Title: Structural aging of a cohesive and amorphous granular solid under cyclic loading

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07852v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 01:41:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Structural aging of a cohesive and amorphous granular solid under cyclic loading 

William Hobson-Rhoades, 1 Douglas J Durian, 2 Yue Fan, 1 and Hongyi Xiao 1, ∗

> 1

University of Michigan Department of Mechanical Engineering 

> 2

University of Pennsylvania Department of Physics and Astronomy 

(Dated: March 10, 2026) We investigate how cyclic loading evolves the structure and deformation behaviors of a granular raft composed of particles floating at an air-oil interface. The raft has a disordered particle pack-ing structure, and is cohesive due to capillary interactions between particles. Under uniaxial cyclic loading with a small strain amplitude, the raft’s packing structure experiences an aging process char-acterized by logarithmically increasing packing fraction and decreasing structural heterogeneity. The observed structural change is due to particle dynamics that are organized around morphologically evolving voids in the raft. The raft is then subjected to quasi-static tension or compression tests until failure. In comparison with non-aged rafts, the rafts that experienced cyclic loading show a higher strength, higher stiffness, and lower ductility, along with qualitatively different features, such as a stress overshoot in the loading curve. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The deformation of amorphous solids is an important process throughout numerous industries, geophysical processes, and everyday life.[1–3] Processes like squeez-ing toothpaste, spreading mayonnaise, and scrubbing a foaming soap exemplify ductile deformation, where a material’s constituent particles continuously rearrange without system-spanning fracture. Conversely, shatter-ing glass, breaking chalk, and large-scale landslides ex-emplify brittle failure, characterized by the formation of shear bands and a steep drop in the loading curve.[4–13] Tuning the ductility of amorphous solids is impor-tant for many engineering applications. A common ap-proach is thermal annealing, which uses sequential tem-perature changes to manipulate a material’s structure and its associated energy landscape. Past studies have uncovered the roles of the annealing temperature, du-ration, and quenching rate on the ductility of various materials.[6, 8, 14–20] As the interplay between struc-ture, elasticity, and plasticity is complex in amorphous solids,[2, 21, 22] a change in ductility is often accompa-nied by concurrent changes in other deformation param-eters, such as the elastic modulus and yield strength.[4– 8, 12, 13, 23] However, this complex interplay also en-ables the manipulation of a disordered structure through mechanical deformation. An amorphous solid can be mechanically annealed to-ward lower energy states via cyclic shear.[14] The lower energy serves to enhance the material stability and gen-erally decrease the ductility.[4–6, 8, 14] Numerical simu-lations have identified several important factors that in-fluence the behaviors of amorphous solids during cyclic shear.[9, 11, 14, 24–26] For example, large shearing am- 

> ∗hongyix@umich.edu

plitudes may induce shear bands,[9, 23] while small am-plitudes can lead the particle system to a localized energy minimum, characterized by reversible particle trajectories.[24, 27–30] However, studies on this topic often rely on simulations of idealized particle systems, while the complexity stem-ming from realistic particle interactions and alternative loading modes[31] has not been addressed. While experiments measuring the change of bulk be-haviors of amorphous solids such as metallic glasses have been informative,[32, 33] obtaining the necessary particle-scale information for a mechanistic understand-ing is challenging. This renders experiments with macro-scopic particles useful, such as granular particles and col-loids, as the particle packing structure and dynamics dur-ing cyclic loading can be directly measured.[29, 34–40] Existing experimental work with macroscopic particles has already revealed novel features in cyclic deformation, such as a perpetual creeping motion, potentially result-ing from complexities in the energy landscape.[38, 40] However, most existing experiments on this topic used particles with steric repulsive interactions, which fail to consider more complicated effects such as long-range at-tractions and repulsion, and possible many-body effects that are generally associated with molecular and atomic solids.[26] To gain a more general understanding of the structural evolution of an amorphous solid during cyclic loading, we use a model experimental system that consists of a disordered and two-dimensional particle raft floating at an air-liquid interface.[22, 41–44] The particle interaction includes a contact-based short range repulsion, friction, and a long-range capillary attraction resulting from buoy-ancy and surface tension, which has a functional form close to that of atomic interactions.[45] The attraction may also have many-body effects if the liquid surface dis-tortion due to the presence of many nearby particles can-not be superposed.[46] In our previous study, we config-

> arXiv:2603.07852v1 [cond-mat.soft] 9 Mar 2026

2ured a uniaxial tension test with the cohesive raft having two free boundaries.[22, 41] This offers a loading mode that contains both volumetric and deviatoric strains, and permits particle packing density change. In this work, we measure the dynamics and structural evolution in a cohesive granular raft subjected to cyclic uniaxial loading protocols. Different from previous cyclic shear protocols that are volume-preserving, we observe a logarithmic increase in the particle packing fraction and a decrease in the structural heterogeneity in the raft, which resembles long-term aging in thermal systems. We con-nect these overall structural changes to microscopic par-ticle dynamics that are organized around void collapsing behavior during cyclic loading. Finally, we discuss how the structural changes in the cyclic loading impact the mechanical behaviors of the raft when it is subjected to subsequent tension or compression deformation until fail-ure.  

> II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

Using a uniaxial deformation apparatus,[41, 47–49] we tested a granular raft composed of a monolayer of poly-disperse spherical particles floating at an air-liquid in-terface, illustrated in Figure 1a. The particles are made of closed-cell Styrofoam, with a density of approximately 15 kg/m 3 and diameters of d = 1 .0±0.1 mm.[41] The liquid is a mineral oil, which has a density of ρ =870 ± 10 kg/m 3 and a kinematic viscosity of ν =13.5 cSt. Its surface tension is γ = 27 .4 ± 0.7 dyn/cm, correspond-ing to a capillary length of lc = pγ/ρg = 1 .8 ± 0.2 mm. This sets a small bond number of Bo = d2/4l2 

> c

≈ 0.08, at which lc approximates the interaction range of the capil-lary attraction between nearby particles.[45, 46] The granular raft has a rectangular shape with height 

L0 = 120 d and width W0 = 60 d, corresponding to roughly 7000 particles. The two shorter sides are bonded to floating boundaries made of hollow carbon fiber tubes, visualized in Figure 1a. To generate the initial packing, we first manually laid a thin column of particles con-necting the two floating boundaries. Then we sprinkled more particles near this column, prompting the particles to join the columnar assembly via capillary attraction. The generated rafts are dense and strictly monolayer. For the loading experiments, we fixed the position of the bottom boundary and used two soft beams to drive the top boundary with controlled displacement δ. We measured the force, F , exerted on the top boundary by the particles by monitoring the small deflection of the beams, as described in our previous work.[41] The speed of the moving boundary is ˙δ = 2 μm/s, setting a cap-illary number, Ca = νρ ˙δ/γ ≈ 1 × 10 −6, meaning that the viscous drag on the particles is negligible in compar-ison to the surface tension-induced particle attraction. The strain rate under this speed is ˙δ/L 0 = 1 .7 × 10 −5 /s. We can therefore assume that the induced deformation is quasi-static. a) 

> Oil Raft Free Boundary Fixed Boundary Soft Beam

# b) c) d)  

> cyclic loading cycle tensile compression
> FIG. 1. a) Schematic of the experimental setup with an image of the particle packing. b) A schematic demonstrating the procedure for a single loading cycle. c) Images demonstrating a tensile loading test. d) Images demonstrating a compression loading test.

Two types of experiments were conducted. The first is a uniaxial small amplitude cyclic deformation exper-iment. Each deformation cycle begins at δ = 0, after which the raft is extended to δ = δA. It is then com-pressed until δ = −δA, before finally returning to δ = 0, as shown in Figure 1b. Because performing thousands of loading cycles can be time consuming, we increased the driving speed to ˙δ = 20 μm/s. A cyclic strain amplitude of ϵA = δA/L 0 =0.3% is selected, which will be discussed in section III. In the second experiment, the raft is subjected to uni-axial tension ( δt > 0) or compression ( δc < 0) until it fails, as illustrated in Figure 1c and d, respectively. To understand the influence of cyclic loading on the me-chanical behavior of the raft, tension and compression tests were performed on the rafts directly following con-struction, as well as the “aged” rafts that had expe-rienced cyclic loading up to cycle number N = 1000. In addition to monitoring the force F , we imaged and tracked the trajectories of all particles in the system, while only using particles that are at least five layers away from the boundaries for analysis. Particle centers are tracked using an image analysis algorithm with sub-3pixel accuracy.[41, 47]  

> III. EFFECT OF STRAIN AMPLITUDE AND NUMBER OF CYCLES
> FIG. 2. Snapshots of granular rafts subjected to a variety of loading amplitudes at several different loading cycle numbers.

Our preliminary results suggest that for ϵA > 1%, cyclic loading rapidly leads to the formation of a system-spanning shear band, which develops into a fracture at 

N ≈ 100, see an experimental snapshot in Figure 2. For 

ϵA ≤ 1%, however, no such shear band forms, allowing the structure of the raft to evolve without global failure. The global strain of 1% roughly coincides with the yield strain of the rafts during tensile tests as reported in our previous study[41] and in section VII of this study, plac-ing our choice of ϵA = 0 .3% in the quasi-elastic regime. This choice is further strengthened by another prelimi-nary experiment in which a cyclic loading amplitude of 

ϵA = 0 .3% was performed up to N = 5000, where no drastic changes or signs of failure were observed in the structure of the raft. The comparison between N = 100 and N = 5000 for ϵA = 0 .3% is also shown in Figure 2.  

> IV. GLOBAL DYNAMICS DURING CYCLIC LOADING

To quantify the degree of structural change between consecutive cycles, we use the non-affine displacement, 

D2min , calculated for each particle i by subtracting a best affine fit of its surrounding displacement field from the actual displacements of its neighbors j.[50] The formula is 

D2min ,i (t, ∆t) = 1

njnj

X

> j=1

|rji (t + ∆ t) − Er ji (t)|2, (1) with rji = rj − ri as the relative position vector be-tween particles i and j, nj is the number of neighbors within 1.25 d of i, and E is a best affine transformation matrix.[50, 51] We consider the time interval ∆ t to be one cycle and time t to be the beginning of each cycle. The system and ensemble average, ⟨D2min ⟩, decreases nearly logarithmically as a function of the loading cycle 

N , see Figure 3a, indicating a slow-down in dynamics. To quantify longer-term particle dynamics, we calcu-late the mean-squared displacement (MSD), ⟨∆r2 

> i

(t)⟩ =

⟨| ri(t) − ri(0) |2⟩, with respect to N = 0. As shown in Figure 3b, the MSD has two regimes: a super-diffusive regime with a slope above 1 for N < 10 and a sub-diffusive regime with a slope below 1 for N ≥ 10. To better understand the observed super-diffusivity, we calculate a cage-relative MSD by subtracting the mean displacement of a particle’s neighborhood from the dis-placement of that particle, written as 

⟨∆r2 

> i

(t)⟩ = ⟨| ri(t) − ri(0) − 1

njnj

X

> j=1

[rj (t) − rj (0)] |2⟩. (2) This eliminates the effect of rigid body motion and leaves only the local affine and non-affine displacements. The result in Figure 3b shows a consistent sub-diffusive be-havior for all shear cycles. For N < 10, the super-diffusivity in the original MSD is due to the rigid body motion of groups of particles. These groups may reside near locations of intense particle rearrangements, possi-bly originating from residual stresses due to the initial raft construction. As previously noted, the structural evolution of our raft distinguishes itself from those with isochoric cyclic shearing simulations, as the presence of the free bound-aries permits density change. The density is tracked through the packing fraction 

ϕ calculated based on a Delaunay triangulation of the particle centers. For each triangle k, we calculate its area Ak and the sum of the circular sector areas, Ak

> sc

, due to the overlap area between k and its three constituent particles (highlighted in green in Figure 4b). The packing fraction is then calculated as ϕ =P 

> k

Ak

> sc

/ P 

> k

Ak.Over the course of 1000 loading cycles, Figure 3c shows that ϕ consistently increases, with a clear long-term log-arithmic trend emerging for N > 100. To detect higher-order structural changes accompa-nying the densification, we characterize local ordering through the widely used bond orientation parameter for each particle i,Ψ6,i = 1

nj

|

> nj

X

> j=1

e6iθ j |, (3) with θj being the angle between the vector rji and a chosen reference direction, and nj in this case denotes the first shell of neighbors from the triangulation. Under this definition, a hexagonally ordered arrange-ment of neighbors around particle i results in Ψ 6,i ≈ 1, and it decreases with increasing disorder. Similar to the 4b) c) f ) d) a) e) 

# 1                      

> FIG. 3. Dynamic and structural quantities during cyclic loading with amplitude δA/L 0= 0 .03 over the course of N= 1000 cycles. a) Normalized particle mean-squared displacement vs. the cycle number. The orange curve is the original MSD and the blue is the cage-relative MSD. Slope of one provided for reference. b) The system-averaged D2min vs. the cycle number. c) The global packing fraction vs. the cycle number. d) The system-averaged bond order parameter Ψ 6vs. the cycle number. e) Distribution of Qkfor N= 0 (yellow) and N= 1000 (blue). The solid curve is a fit to the Gaussian distribution. Inset demonstrates the Voronoi cell anisotropy vectors for a single Delaunay triangle. f) The standard deviation of Qkvs. the cycle number. In all panels, the data points and shades respectively represent the mean and the test-to-test fluctuations from 19 repetitions.

packing fraction, ⟨Ψ6⟩ gradually increases, with a loga-rithmic trend for N > 100, as shown in Figure 3d, indi-cating increased ordering in the raft. We then characterize the packing structure’s spatial fluctuations based on the Delaunay triangulation and the corresponding Voronoi tessellation. Specifically, we calculate the weighted divergence of the Voronoi cell anisotropy vector,[41, 52] Qk, which can be calculated for each Delaunay triangle k as 

Qk ≡ (∇ · c)( Ak/⟨A⟩), (4) where c is the Voronoi cell anisotropy vector pointing from a particle’s center to the centroid of its Voronoi cell, as illustrated in the inset of Figure 3e. The divergence in triangle k is evaluated based on the c vectors of the three constituent particles,[52] which is further weighted by the ratio between the triangle area Ak and the average triangle area ⟨A⟩ to ensure a zero mean. Under this defi-nition, a triangle covering a tightly packed region should have its c vectors pointing outward, resulting in Qk > 0, and a triangle covering a loosely packed region should have c pointing inward and Qk < 0. The distributions of Qk for N = 0 and N = 1000 are shown in Figure 3e, and both are Gaussian-like around 

Qk = 0. For larger |Qk|, the distributions have tails that trend above a Gaussian fit, signaling the existence of regions with highly heterogeneous local packing fractions in the raft. When comparing the distributions of Qk

from N = 0 and N = 1000, a decrease in the standard deviation, std (Qk), is observed for larger values of N ,which, similar to ϕ and Ψ 6, behaves logarithmically for 

N > 100 as in Figure 3f. To help contextualize our results thus far, we can draw an analogy between the mechanically driven raft and a thermal system. The amplitude of the excitation, ϵA, was held constant, which is analogous to a constant tempera-ture. Additionally, the long-term logarithmic structural evolution after N ≈ 100 is analogous to the aging of a thermal glass below the glass transition temperature, which evolves toward lower energy states characterized by densification, more homogeneous structure, and in-creased ordering. We therefore refer to this process as mechanical aging. In terms of dynamics, the decrease in non-affine motion (Figure 3a) is similar to previous molecular dynamic simulation results,[9] which suggest that particles should evolve toward configurations with lower potential energies. The slow and long-term increase in the cage-relative MSD (Figure 3b) is also reminiscent of the MSD observed in aging thermal glasses.[53, 54] We note that similar correspondences between mechani-cal driving and thermal activation have been recognized in other disordered solids, particularly metallic glasses. Atomistic studies have demonstrated that external stress 5can markedly accelerate relaxation dynamics - effec-tively mimicking an increase in temperature - through facilitated exploration of a complex, fractal-like energy landscape.[55, 56] Moreover, stress–temperature scaling relations have been proposed in steady-state flow,[57] in-dicating the existence of quantitative mappings between mechanical and thermal variables. These precedents sug-gest that the resemblance uncovered here is not incidental but may reflect a more general principle of glassy dynam-ics. In this light, the present experimental system could, in the future, provide a controlled platform to probe and possibly quantify the correspondence between mechani-cal forcing and effective thermal aging in granular glasses. A systematic exploration of such mappings, however, is beyond the scope of this manuscript and warrants further study.  

> V. VOID-DRIVEN MICROSCOPIC DYNAMICS frequency

# Void 3 4 5 6 7 8d) c) b) a)           

> FIG. 4. Void identification and void area calculation. a) A binarized image showcasing an identified void. b) The origi-nal experimental image corresponding to a), overlaid with its Delaunay triangles highlighted in red. An example triangle k
> is highlighted with black borders, and the associated particles are highlighted in orange. The circular sectors of the particles are highlighted in green. The insets illustrate the areas Ak
> bp ,
> Ak
> sc , and Akthat are calculated for each triangle k.c) Dis-tributions of void areas based on the number of constituent particles making up the boundary of a void across all experi-ments taken at N= 1000. d) A plot of the system-averaged void size across all experiments against the cycle number. The shaded region indicates standard error across repeated exper-iments.

The increase in packing fraction and decrease in struc-tural heterogeneity observed during the aging process point towards the possibility that loosely packed regions are especially prone to rearrangements that result in lo-cal densification and spatial homogenization. To quan-tify this possible interplay between structure and defor-mation, we identify voids from experimental images by distinguishing the particle phase from the background oil phase through binarization, with an example shown in Figure 4a. To evaluate the area of a void, we again rely on the Delaunay triangulation, which partitions each void into triangles, where the vertices of the Delaunay triangles fall on the boundary particles surrounding a void. For each triangle k, we calculate three areas, in-cluding the triangle area Ak, the sum of the particle cir-cular sector areas, Ak

> sc

, and the enclosed area, Ak

> bp

, as the area between three constituent particles if they are closely packed. All area types are depicted in Figure 4b. The void area Av is then calculated as 

Av =

> nvt

X

> k=1

Ak − Ak 

> sc

− Ak

> bp

, (5) where nvt denotes the number of constituent triangles for each void. Under this definition, a void surrounded by three closely packed particles (as in Figure 4b) will have zero area, as there is no room for its area to further reduce. In Figure 4c, we show the distributions of normalized void areas, ˜Av = 4 Av /πd 2, which are categorized by the number of their constituent particles Nbp . For voids with larger Nbp , both the average and the variance of the void areas are larger. Note that although voids with Nbp = 3 should have ˜Av = 0, some non-zero values exist due to measurement noise, and they should be neglected as they are only small fractions of a particle’s projected area. We then track the system-averaged void areas across all repeated experiments as N increases. Initially, ⟨ ˜Av ⟩ in-creases slightly, before decreasing nearly logarithmically after N = 100 to a value significantly lower than the ini-tial average void size. This behavior is consistent with the packing fraction curve in Figure 3c, where there is an initial decrease in the packing fraction, followed by a logarithmic increase after N = 100. The plot of system-averaged void area against N can be seen in Figure 4d. To understand how voids influence the dynamics of the raft during structural aging, we examine the parti-cle displacement field of the raft, with an example shown in Figure 5a. Specifically, we compute the average dis-placement field around each void by spatially binning the particle displacement as a function of the particle posi-tion relative to the centroid of each void and subtracting the average background displacement. We then discount all bins with less than 20 data points. The resulting displacement field, when calculated for 

Nbp = 4, only exhibits small radially outward displace-ments roughly one particle diameter away from the cen-ter, as shown in Figure 5b. When Nbp > 4, however, a noticeable tendency for particles to move toward the void’s center is observed, as shown in Figure 5c. Aslightly higher displacement magnitude is observed in the 6d) e) c) 

# a) 

# b)                   

> FIG. 5. Dynamics of particles near voids. a) An experimental image overlaid with particle trajectories (blue) and large iden-tified voids (red). Trajectories are from N= 0 to N= 1000. b) Relative displacement field around a void from N= 0 to
> N= 1000 with Nbp = 4, averaged across all experiments. c) Average displacement field around a void from N= 0 to
> N= 1000 with Nbp >4 across all experiments. d) Particles colored by D2min ,L with large voids highlighted in red. e) The averaged ¯D2min ,L of particles as a function of their distance to the closest void, plotted for different void sizes.

direction of the free boundaries, highlighting the effect of their presence. This result suggests that the displace-ment field of the raft may be primarily driven by voids with Nbp > 4, and that voids with Nbp = 4 may have little impact on the dynamics of the raft. To further quantify the dynamics of the raft near voids, we examine the non-affine particle motion close to the identified voids, with an example visualized in Figure 5d. As a void typically evolves over many loading cycles, we evaluate Equation 1 using particle positions from the initial and the final cycle of an experiment, yield-ing D2min ,L , with the subscript L introduced to distin-guish from the frame-by-frame D2min . For each void, we establish a local reference at the void’s centroid and av-erage the D2min ,L of the nearby particles at different dis-tances, dv . The resulting average, ¯D2min ,L (dv ), shown in Figure 5e, indicates that the non-affinity generally rises close to voids and is higher for larger voids. All void sizes seem to have the same radius of influence of dv /d ≈ 3, at which ¯D2min ,L converges to the background value. Voids with ˜Av < 0.29, however, tend to have slightly lower ¯D2min ,L when measured close to the void than the back-ground value measured far away. Based on Figure 4c, the area threshold of ˜Av <= 0 .29 roughly corresponds to Nbp ≤ 4, and higher bins are mostly populated by voids with Nbp > 4. It follows that voids with areas above the ˜Av = 0 .29 threshold contribute significantly more to the change in structure of the raft, which may be due to lower rearrangement energy barriers in close proximity to them. If so, we may expect that a parti-cle located in a region with a high density of voids may be particularly susceptible to rearrangements that result in densification, some instances of which can be seen in Figure 5a and Figure 5d.  

> VI. EVOLUTION OF VOID MORPHOLOGY

Although the dynamics of particles near voids have been explored, we have yet to investigate the way that a void’s morphology changes as a result of those dynamics. Therefore, we further quantify the evolution of voids by tracking each void across consecutive loading cycles, as a consequence of the non-affine displacements of particles nearby. For a time series of binarized 2D images (Fig-ure 4a), we stack them into a 3D spatial-temporal image, in which each void occupies a continuous volume that can be easily identified, eventually yielding a time history of its area ˜Av . We also track events involving several voids merging into one, and a single void splitting into several voids. In this case, we calculate the summed area of all contributing voids for an event, also denoted by ˜Av , so that we can quantify the change in void area, ∆ ˜Av , due to a given event. Following observations of void tendencies, we classify the morphological change of voids into four types of events. We use Common-type to denote a change in a void’s area as its constituent particles rearrange, but without change to its connectivity in the 3D spatial-temporal image. For this analysis, we do not include voids with Nbp = 3. Moving on, the Split-type denotes an event in which a single void splits into multiple voids, while the Merge-type corresponds to multiple voids merging into a sin-gle void. Finally, the Other-type represents a complex morphology change, where multiple voids reorganize into multiple new voids, in a way that cannot be decomposed into simple merging or splitting. For all four types, we calculate ∆ ˜Av using a small loading cycle interval of 70.5 11.5 2-0.025 -0.02 -0.015 -0.01 -0.005 01200 400 600 800 1000 -1 -0.5 00.5 110 210 410 6   

> Other Common Split Merge -200 -100 0100 200 -0.04 -0.02 0.02 0.04 0
> a) frequency N
> b)
> event type
> c)
> Common Split Merge Other
> d)

FIG. 6. The change of void morphology during cyclic loading. a) Frequency count of the area change for different void behav-ior types. b) The total void area change (left axis, turquoise) and average individual void area change (right axis, dark blue) due to specific event type. c) The change in void area vs. cur-rent void area for Common-type voids. The shaded regions indicate standard error across experiments. d) A histogram of the orientations of the principal axes for voids with Nbp > 4(right half) and Nbp = 4 (left half). Data points taken at 

N = 0 are shown in dark blue, and data points taken at 

N = 1000 are shown in turquoise. 

∆N = 2. Under this definition, we sampled events throughout a cyclic loading test and from 14 tests with different initial packing structures. Figure 6a shows a frequency count of the change in void area ∆ ˜Av for the four types of events, revealing that Common-type events are the most com-mon by several orders of magnitude. Similar numbers of Merge-type and Split-type events are observed, followed by the least frequent Other-type events. For a given type of void event, we then calculate the average area change per void, ∆ ˜Av , and the total area change, ∆ ˜Atot  

> v

, see Figure 6b. On average, Split-type and Merge-type events result in negative and positive area change, respectively. Common-type events have a slightly negative ∆ ˜Av on average and the associated mag-nitude |∆ ˜Av | is significantly smaller than that of Merge-type and Split-type events, which are similar to each other. Despite this, Common-type events are so much more frequent that their contribution to the total area change, ∆ ˜Atot  

> v

, is greater than any other event type. Ad-ditionally, as Merge-type and Split-type events occur at similar frequencies and with opposite signs in ∆ ˜Av , their contributions to ∆ ˜Atot  

> v

nearly cancel out. Finally, al-though Other-type events have a negative ∆ ˜Av , their low frequencies prevent any significant ∆ ˜Atot  

> v

.As Common-type events have the greatest contribution to the densification of the raft, we examine the depen-dence of their area change, ∆ ˜Av , on their current size ˜Av . We binned all applicable voids by ˜Av , and calcu-lated the bin-averaged ∆ ˜Av for voids sampled at various 

N , which is shown in Figure 6c. The results show that for the smallest area bin, which is almost entirely composed of voids with Nbp = 4, a small, positive, area change is observed. This indicates that these voids grow in small increments more than they shrink, consistent with the small radially outward displacement fields observed in Figure 5b. It is worth pointing out that the area change due to a void switching from Nbp = 4 to Nbp = 3 is not considered Common-type and is therefore not repre-sented in Figure 6. For larger voids, however, the change in area is neg-ative, and nearly identical across different values of ˜Av .The radially inward displacement field from Figure 5c corroborates this observation. The sign switch in ∆ ˜Av

between the two smallest area bins provides further evi-dence of differing void behavior between Nbp > 4 ( ˜Av >

0.29) voids and Nbp ≤ 4 ( ˜Av ≤ 0.29) voids. This aligns with the tendency of Nbp > 4 voids to contribute signif-icantly more to the raft’s dynamics than Nbp ≤ 4 voids, which was first observed in Figure 5e. There is also a dependence of ∆ ˜Av on N , showing that 

|∆ ˜Av | is smaller for larger N , similar to the dynamic slow-down observed in Figure 3. This result, along with those from Figure 3, suggests that most of the structural change occurs in the earlier stages of cyclic loading. Finally, void orientation can be investigated as a result of aging. To determine the orientation of a single void, the pixels composing a void from an experimental image are used to identify the major axis of an ellipse with the same normalized second central moments. The orienta-tion, θ, is then defined as the angle that this axis makes with another axis running parallel to the fixed bound-aries of the raft. We can then separate the orientation of voids into two categories, Nbp = 4 and Nbp > 4, to dis-tinguish whether the behaviors are different, motivated by the differences between Nbp = 4 and Nbp > 4 voids observed in Figure 5 and Figure 6c. We can then sepa-rate them further into groups of N = 0 or N = 1000 to observe the effects of mechanical aging. We see that all void sizes initially show a preference toward θ = 0, especially for the case of voids with Nbp =4. At N = 1000, voids with Nbp > 4 tend to be oriented perpendicularly more often than at N = 0, although a preference for θ = 0 remains. Voids with Nbp = 4 at N =1000, however, are found most frequently at multiples of 

θ = π 

> 4

, coinciding with the direction of maximum shear stress in a uniaxially deformed material, and also similar to the orientation of the shear bands observed in the next section. The histogram showing the probability density of all void orientations is shown in Figure 6d. Therefore, voids with Nbp > 4 experience larger neg-ative area changes and contribute significantly more to the density change of the raft than voids with Nbp = 4. Voids with Nbp = 4, however, do not remain static, in-8= 0 1.0% 2.0% 3.0% 5.0% 

> Aged Compression Non-aged Compression Aged Tension Non-aged Tension

# c) 

> Non-aged Non-aged Aged Aged Non-aged Non-aged Aged Aged

# a) b) d) 

FIG. 7. Uniaxial tension and compression tests on the non-aged and aged rafts. a) Stress-strain curves for the non-aged (light orange) and aged (dark orange) rafts in tensile tests, averaged over 16 and 14 repetitions for each experiment, respectively. b) Stress-strain curves for the non-aged (light blue) and aged (dark blue) rafts in compression tests, averaged over five and eight repetitions for each experiment, respectively. c) A visualization of the particle D2min in the non-aged and aged rafts undergoing compression and tension, shown for various global strains. d) The average void area vs. global strain for the cases in a) and b) using the same color scheme. The shaded regions in a), b), and d) indicate test-to-test fluctuations. 

stead exhibiting a dramatic shift in their orientations over the course of aging, in contrast to the minor orientation change observed for voids with Nbp > 4. 

VII. IMPLICATIONS OF AGING ON RAFT FAILURE 

To investigate how the structural changes induced by cyclic loading affect the yielding behavior of the raft, we subject aged rafts (loaded to N = 1000), as well as non-aged rafts (without any cyclic loading history), to uniaxial tension and uniaxial compression. We measure 

Fi/γW 0 against the global strain ϵ = δi/L 0, where i = t

for tension and i = c for compression. We also visualize the deformation behavior of the rafts by overlaying exper-imental images with particles colored by their respective 

D2min values, which are calculated over a strain interval ∆ϵ = 0 .001. The results are displayed in Figure 7. In tensile tests, both aged and non-aged rafts display a similar tensile stiffness, measured as the slope of the initial increment of the loading curve, until the onset of yielding at ϵ ≈ 0.01. However, the strength of the aged rafts, defined as the maximum value of Ft/γW 0, is slightly larger than that of the non-aged rafts, which is shown in Figure 7a. Also associated with the aged rafts is a faster decay in the tensile stress following ϵ > 0.01. These results indicate that aged rafts are slightly stronger and more brittle during tensile deformation. The visu-alization of two example rafts (Figure 7c), representing aged and non-aged rafts, reveals shear banding that is narrower in the aged case through more concentrated re-gions of high D2min .While the loading curves were similar up to yielding in the tensile tests of the aged and non-aged rafts, there are clear differences between the two types of compres-sion tests as shown in Figure 7b. The relation between 

Fc/γW 0 and ϵ indicates a significantly higher stiffness for the aged rafts, as well as a significantly higher yield strength at ϵ ≈ 0.03, which coincides with a unified yield 9strain value of a variety of disordered solids.[58] Beyond the yielding point, the two loading curves are rather dis-tinct. While the stress for the non-aged rafts continu-ously increases until it plateaus, a significant overshoot exists in the curve for the aged raft, followed by a stress drop toward the same plateau as in the non-aged case, indicating a history-independent steady state-like behav-ior. The stress drop in the aged rafts before the plateau is indicative of a brittle behavior, while the continuous stress increase in the non-aged rafts indicates ductile be-havior. Correspondingly, the shear bands tend to be nar-rower in the aged rafts, with the particles inside having higher D2min , as seen in Figure 7c. Another difference between tension and compression tests manifests in the orientation of the shear band dur-ing failure. The orientation of the shear band during compression is above π/ 4, and below π/ 4 during tensile tests, suggesting that volumetric effects and friction may be important for the yielding process.[59, 60] As a final analysis, we investigate the behavior of voids during the uniaxial loading tests by examining the aver-age void area ⟨ ˜Av ⟩ vs ϵ, which can be calculated using Equation 5 and normalized in the same way as in sec-tion V. In all tests, ⟨ ˜Av ⟩ increases with ϵ, showing that the raft generally dilates regardless of the deformation mode. The plot of ⟨ ˜Av ⟩ against ϵ is shown in Figure 7d. For tension, this is a straightforward outcome due to the imposed extensional volumetric strain. The dilation ob-served in the compression tests, however, indicate that the deviatoric part of the imposed uniaxial deformation dominates the volumetric part, as deviatoric deformation often induces dilation in dense granular materials. This suggests that the densification of the raft played a role in its lowered ductility, as greater dilation was required to reach steady-state behavior, which is a signature of brittle-like failure.  

> VIII. CONCLUSIONS

We have demonstrated that a cohesive granular raft subject to small amplitude cyclic loading experiences structural evolution analogous to aging observed in ther-mal systems, caused in part by a long-term logarithmic increase in the raft’s density. This density change is only possible due to the presence of free boundaries and uniaxial loading conditions, which promotes changes to volume. Other parameters tied closely to the structure of the raft, such as the bond orientation parameter and structural heterogeneity, also change logarithmically with cycle number, consistent with the dynamic slow-down in the cage-relative M SD/d 2 and ⟨D2

> min

⟩/d 2.To address the source of structural evolution during aging, we monitor voids, defined as discrete areas asso-ciated with gaps in the particle packing structure. We see that the area of voids also decreases logarithmically, but that large and small voids exhibit very different be-haviors. Large voids tend to displace nearby particles toward their center during aging, shrinking the void’s area and increasing the density of the raft. Addition-ally, using ¯D2 

> min,L

as a metric for structural evolution, we see that larger void areas tend to induce more struc-tural change in their close vicinity. Further analysis sug-gests that although large scale rearrangements individ-ually contribute the most to the area change of a void, it is the smaller rearrangements that dominate the den-sity change of the raft. Thus, the structural change of the raft is associated closely with the shrinking of large voids, and the density change is most influenced by small, but commonplace, rearrangements to those voids. Smaller voids, which can be classified as having four constituent boundary particles, behave very differently. On average, these voids tend to grow slightly, but on a magnitude appreciably smaller than the area change as-sociated with larger voids. Despite this small contribu-tion to total raft density, we see that these voids are not inactive, as a distribution of their orientations changes to align primarily with an angle of π/ 4 radians with the hor-izontal after 1000 loading cycles, despite initially align-ing with the horizontal axis. Larger voids, meanwhile, see very little change to the distribution of their orien-tations, suggesting that small voids are more susceptible to changes in orientation. The structural changes to the raft culminate in altered deformation properties and failure mechanisms. Aged rafts undergoing tensile tests have a higher strength than non-aged rafts, but also exhibit more brittle behavior. A similar trend is observed under compression, with the added observation of increased stiffness and a stress over-shoot, indicating brittle failure and a dilating material. This additional dilation is due to the increased density of the raft, and thus the shrinking of large voids. Re-gardless of preparation history, however, all rafts under compression tend to a steady state behavior for large strains. Investigating the area of voids during these uni-axial tests confirms particularly strong dilation during the compression of aged rafts. Also observed is a shear band close to π/ 4 radians for all failure tests, but with a higher or lower angle depending on whether the test was under compression or tension, respectively. Our experiment has potential applications in the study of yielding disordered solids, as we can intentionally trig-ger a stress overshoot during yielding via well-controlled cyclic loading. Our methods for monitoring the raft’s microscopic structure and dynamics could be used to better understand how the preparation history of an out-of-equilibrium disordered solid influence the nature of its yielding transition.[3, 4, 61] The capillary-induced particle attraction and the particle friction also renders our experimental system suitable to study whether com-plex particle interactions give rise to rugged energy land-scapes of an amorphous solid, exhibiting possibly perpet-ual irreversibility.[38, 40, 51] 10 

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

There are no conflicts to declare. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors would like to acknowledge the fund-ing from the National Science Foundation grant MRSEC/DMR-1720530 and grant CMMI-2519512. We also thank Andrea J. Liu for helpful discussions. 

[1] D. Bonn, M. M. Denn, L. Berthier, T. Divoux, and S. Manneville, Yield stress materials in soft condensed matter, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89 , 035005 (2017). [2] A. Nicolas, E. E. Ferrero, K. Martens, and J.-L. Barrat, Deformation and flow of amorphous solids: Insights from elastoplastic models, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90 , 045006 (2018). [3] L. Berthier, G. Biroli, L. Manning, and F. Zamponi, Yielding and plasticity in amorphous solids, Nat. Rev. Phys. , 1 (2025). [4] M. Ozawa, L. Berthier, G. Biroli, A. Rosso, and G. Tar-jus, Random critical point separates brittle and ductile yielding transitions in amorphous materials, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115 , 6656 (2018). [5] M. Popovi´ c, T. W. de Geus, and M. Wyart, Elastoplas-tic description of sudden failure in athermal amorphous materials during quasistatic loading, Phys. Rev. E 98 ,040901 (2018). [6] H. J. Barlow, J. O. Cochran, and S. M. Fielding, Ductile and brittle yielding in thermal and athermal amorphous materials, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125 , 168003 (2020). [7] M. Singh, M. Ozawa, and L. Berthier, Brittle yielding of amorphous solids at finite shear rates, Phys. Rev. Mater. 

4, 025603 (2020). [8] W.-T. Yeh, M. Ozawa, K. Miyazaki, T. Kawasaki, and L. Berthier, Glass stability changes the nature of yield-ing under oscillatory shear, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 , 225502 (2020). [9] N. V. Priezjev, Mechanical annealing and yielding tran-sition in cyclically sheared binary glasses, J. Non-Cryst. Solids 590 , 121697 (2022). [10] A. D. Parmar, S. Kumar, and S. Sastry, Strain local-ization above the yielding point in cyclically deformed glasses, Phys. Rev. X 9, 021018 (2019). [11] P. Leishangthem, A. D. Parmar, and S. Sastry, The yield-ing transition in amorphous solids under oscillatory shear deformation, Nat. Commun. 8, 14653 (2017). [12] J. Pollard and S. M. Fielding, Yielding, shear banding, and brittle failure of amorphous materials, Phys. Rev. Res. 4, 043037 (2022). [13] R. Sharma and S. Karmakar, Activity-induced anneal-ing leads to a ductile-to-brittle transition in amorphous solids, Nat. Phys. 21 , 253 (2025). [14] P. Das, A. D. Parmar, and S. Sastry, Annealing glasses by cyclic shear deformation, J. Chem. Phys. 157 , 044501 (2022). [15] N. V. Priezjev, Molecular dynamics simulations of the mechanical annealing process in metallic glasses: Ef-fects of strain amplitude and temperature, J. Non-Cryst. Solids 479 , 42 (2018). [16] M. Utz, P. G. Debenedetti, and F. H. Stillinger, Atom-istic simulation of aging and rejuvenation in glasses, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 , 1471 (2000). [17] M. Fan, M. Wang, K. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Schroers, M. D. Shattuck, and C. S. O’Hern, Effects of cooling rate on particle rearrangement statistics: Rapidly cooled glasses are more ductile and less reversible, Phys. Rev. E 95 ,022611 (2017). [18] J. Shen, Y. Huang, and J. Sun, Plasticity of a ticu-based bulk metallic glass: Effect of cooling rate, J. Mater. Res. 

22 , 3067 (2007). [19] E. Bouchbinder and I. Procaccia, Cooling-rate depen-dence of the shear modulus of amorphous solids, Phys. Rev. E 87 , 042310 (2013). [20] J. Ketkaew, W. Chen, H. Wang, A. Datye, M. Fan, G. Pereira, U. D. Schwarz, Z. Liu, R. Yamada, W. Dmowski, et al. , Mechanical glass transition revealed by the fracture toughness of metallic glasses, Nat. Com-mun. 9, 3271 (2018). [21] G. Zhang, H. Xiao, E. Yang, R. J. Ivancic, S. A. Rid-out, R. A. Riggleman, D. J. Durian, and A. J. Liu, Structuro-elasto-plasticity model for large deformation of disordered solids, Phys. Rev. Res. 4, 043026 (2022). [22] H. Xiao, G. Zhang, E. Yang, R. Ivancic, S. Ridout, R. Riggleman, D. J. Durian, and A. J. Liu, Identifying microscopic factors that influence ductility in disordered solids, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 120 , e2307552120 (2023). [23] N. V. Priezjev, Shear band healing in amorphous materi-als by small-amplitude oscillatory shear deformation, J. Non-Cryst. Solids 566 , 120874 (2021). [24] N. C. Keim and P. E. Arratia, Mechanical and micro-scopic properties of the reversible plastic regime in a 2d jammed material, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 , 028302 (2014). [25] P. K. Jana and N. V. Priezjev, Relaxation dynamics in amorphous alloys under asymmetric cyclic shear defor-mation, J. Non-Cryst. Solids 600 , 121996 (2023). [26] H. Li, H. Xiao, T. Egami, and Y. Fan, Infinitely rugged intra-cage potential energy landscape in metallic glasses caused by many-body interaction, Mater. Today Phys. 

49 , 101582 (2024). [27] Y. Jin, P. Urbani, F. Zamponi, and H. Yoshino, Astability-reversibility map unifies elasticity, plasticity, yielding, and jamming in hard sphere glasses, Sci. Adv. 

4, eaat6387 (2018). [28] N. C. Keim and D. Medina, Mechanical annealing and memories in a disordered solid, Sci. Adv. 8, eabo1614 (2022). [29] S. Slotterback, M. Mailman, K. Ronaszegi, M. Van Hecke, M. Girvan, and W. Losert, Onset 11 

of irreversibility in cyclic shear of granular packings, Phys. Rev. E 85 , 021309 (2012). [30] J. R. Royer and P. M. Chaikin, Precisely cyclic sand: Self-organization of periodically sheared frictional grains, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112 , 49 (2015). [31] P. K. Jana and N. V. Priezjev, Structural relaxation in amorphous materials under cyclic tension-compression loading, J. Non-Cryst. Solids 540 , 120098 (2020). [32] M. Zhang, L. H. Dai, and L. Liu, Mechanical annealing in the flow of supercooled metallic liquid, J. Appl. Phys. 

116 , 053522 (2014). [33] Y. Wang, M. Zhang, and L. Liu, Mechanical annealing in the homogeneous deformation of bulk metallic glass un-der elastostatic compression, Scr. Mater. 102 , 67 (2015). [34] N. W. Mueggenburg, Behavior of granular materials un-der cyclic shear, Phys. Rev. E 71 , 031301 (2005). [35] P. Richard, M. Nicodemi, R. Delannay, P. Ribiere, and D. Bideau, Slow relaxation and compaction of granular systems, Nat. Mater. 4, 121 (2005). [36] J. Zhang, T. Majmudar, A. Tordesillas, and R. Behringer, Statistical properties of a 2d granu-lar material subjected to cyclic shear, Granul. Matter 

12 , 159 (2010). [37] S. Farhadi, A. Z. Zhu, and R. P. Behringer, Stress relax-ation for granular materials near jamming under cyclic compression, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 , 188001 (2015). [38] H. Xiao, A. J. Liu, and D. J. Durian, Probing gard-ner physics in an active quasithermal pressure-controlled granular system of noncircular particles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

128 , 248001 (2022). [39] Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, D. Wang, H. Zheng, B. Chakraborty, and J. E. Socolar, Ultrastable shear-jammed granular material, Phys. Rev. X 12 , 031021 (2022). [40] Y. Yuan, Z. Zeng, Y. Xing, H. Yuan, S. Zhang, W. Kob, and Y. Wang, From creep to flow: Granular materials under cyclic shear, Nat. Commun. 15 , 3866 (2024). [41] H. Xiao, R. Ivancic, and D. Durian, Strain localization and failure of disordered particle rafts with tunable duc-tility during tensile deformation, Soft Matter 16 , 8226 (2020). [42] K.-ˆI. Tˆ o and S. R. Nagel, Rifts in rafts, Soft Matter 19 ,905 (2023). [43] B. C. Druecke, R. Mukherjee, X. Cheng, and S. Lee, Col-lapse of a granular raft: Transition from single particle falling to collective creasing, Phys. Rev. Fluids 8, 024003 (2023). [44] S. Proti` ere, Particle rafts and armored droplets, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 55 , 459 (2023). [45] M. Nicolson, The interaction between floating particles, in Math. Proc. Camb. Philos. Soc. , Vol. 45 (Cambridge University Press, 1949) pp. 288–295. [46] M.-J. Dalbe, D. Cosic, M. Berhanu, and A. Kudrolli, Ag-gregation of frictional particles due to capillary attrac-tion, Phys. Rev. E 83 , 051403 (2011). [47] J. M. Rieser, Deformation of two-dimensional amorphous granular packings (University of Pennsylvania, 2015). [48] M. Harrington and D. J. Durian, Anisotropic parti-cles strengthen granular pillars under compression, Phys. Rev. E 97 , 012904 (2018). [49] M. Harrington, H. Xiao, and D. J. Durian, Stagnant zone formation in a 2d bed of circular and elongated grains under penetration, Granul. Matter 22 , 1 (2020). [50] M. L. Falk and J. S. Langer, Dynamics of viscoplastic deformation in amorphous solids, Phys. Rev. E 57 , 7192 (1998). [51] W. Li, J. M. Rieser, A. J. Liu, D. J. Durian, and J. Li, Deformation-driven diffusion and plastic flow in amor-phous granular pillars, Phys. Rev. E 91 , 062212 (2015). [52] J. M. Rieser, C. P. Goodrich, A. J. Liu, and D. J. Durian, Divergence of voronoi cell anisotropy vector: a threshold-free characterization of local structure in amorphous ma-terials, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 , 088001 (2016). [53] B. Seoane and F. Zamponi, Spin-glass-like aging in col-loidal and granular glasses, Soft Matter 14 , 5222 (2018). [54] A. P. Hammond and E. I. Corwin, Experimental obser-vation of the marginal glass phase in a colloidal glass, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117 , 5714 (2020). [55] P. Cao, M. P. Short, and S. Yip, Understanding the mech-anisms of amorphous creep through molecular simula-tion, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114 , 13631 (2017). [56] C. Liu and Y. Fan, Emergent fractal energy landscape as the origin of stress-accelerated dynamics in amorphous solids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 , 215502 (2021). [57] P. Guan, M. Chen, and T. Egami, Stress-temperature scaling for steady-state flow in metallic glasses, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 , 205701 (2010). [58] E. D. Cubuk, R. Ivancic, S. S. Schoenholz, D. Strick-land, A. Basu, Z. Davidson, J. Fontaine, J. L. Hor, Y.-R. Huang, Y. Jiang, et al. , Structure-property relation-ships from universal signatures of plasticity in disordered solids, Science 358 , 1033 (2017). [59] J. Bardet, A comprehensive review of strain localization in elastoplastic soils, Comput. Geotech. 10 , 163 (1990). [60] K. Karimi and J.-L. Barrat, Correlation and shear bands in a plastically deformed granular medium, Sci. Rep. 8,1 (2018). [61] R. L. Moorcroft, M. E. Cates, and S. M. Fielding, Age-dependent transient shear banding in soft glasses, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 , 055502 (2011).