Title: 2603.07383v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07383v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 00:59:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
# DiffSIM: Unconditional and conditional facies simulation based on denoising 

# diffusion generative models 

Minghui Xu 1, Suihong Song 1, Tapan Mukerji 1,2,3 

> 1

Department of Energy Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 

USA 

> 2

Department of Geophysics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 

> 3

Department of Earth & Planetary Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 

Key Points: 

• Developed two diffusion -based generative models for facies -model simulation 

• Demonstrated high -fidelity unconditional generation using multiple distributional 

metrics 

• Introduced a mask -based conditioning strategy to honor hard well facies constraints Abstract 

Constructing subsurface facies models that are geologically plausible and constrained by 

well facies is essential for analyzing sedimentary evolution, reservoir characterization, and 

flow simulation. Recent deep generative model -based geomodelling methods have 

demonstrated promising capabilities for both unconditional and conditional settings . We 

investigate denoising diffusion models as a generative framework for producing realistic and 

diverse facies realizations in both settings. Diffusion models generat e samples through a 

fixed forward noising process and a learned reverse denoising process. For unconditional 

geomodelling, we use denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) to learn geological 

patterns from training facies models, and adopt denoising diffusion implicit models (DDIMs) 

to accelerate sampling by reducing inference steps from 1500 to 50 (30× fewer steps). We 

assess the geological plausibility using data distribution, class proportions, variograms, and 

geometric features. Quantitative comp arisons show that the generated realizations closely 

match the test set across these metrics, indicating that diffusion models capture realistic 

geological patterns while maintaining diversity. To enable conditional generation, we

encode well facies and their spatial locations as conditional indicators and apply a mask -

based denoising strategy that generates facies only in between -well regions, guaranteeing 

hard conditioning without introducing additional loss weights. We evaluate both 

unconditional and con ditional generation on three scenarios: two two -dimensional cases 

(meandering channels and point bars) and one three -dimensional point -bar case. Across 

these scenarios, unconditional generation reproduces geological realism , and conditional 

generation honors well data while producing geologically consistent between -well 

realizations, demonstrating practical utility for facies geomodelling applications. 1. Introduction 

Geomodelling – constructing earth models consistent with geological knowledge ,

borehole interpretations, geophysical observations , and dynamic borehole observations –

is essential for understanding geological processes, managing earth resources including 

underground water, CO 2 storage , minerals, and hydrocarbon s, as well as making 

sustainable decision s. Three important criteria of geomodelling evaluation include realism 

(i.e., consistency with geological knowledge and spatial patterns ), conditioning degree to 

the given data (e.g., borehole and geophysical data), and diversity (expressing variability and 

uncertainty) of the constructed geomodels. Creating geomodels with high realism, accurate 

conditioning performance, and sufficient diversity is crucial for informed decision -making in 

earth resource management. 

Two typical geostatistics -based geomodelling methods are variogram -based (Oliver 

& Webster, 2014) and multi -point statistics (MPS ; Strebelle 2002) -based approaches . They 

have been applied to reservoir geo modeling (e.g., Linde et al. 2015 ; Tahmasebi 2018) and 

geophysical inversion (Bosch et al., 2010) , with their own advantages and disadvantages. In 

variogram -based methods , variograms representing spatial two -point relations are 

calculated to express geological patterns , and the constructed geomodels exhibit relatively 

weak geological realism. In contrast, MPS -based methods utilize multiple -point spatial 

relations to express geological patterns, thus leading to more realistic results as compared 

to variogram -based methods . However, the generated realism from MPS still needs 

improvement when modelling co mplex heterogeneous reservoirs (S. Song, Huang, et al., 

2025) .

Deep generative methods have proven capable of synthesizing realistic images 

(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Karras et al., 2017) and videos (Voleti et al., 2024; 

T. -C. Wang et al., 2018) . Commonly used generative methods (Bond -Taylor et al., 2022) 

include variational autoencoders (VAEs ; Kingma and Welling 2013 ), flow -based models 

(Durk P Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) , generative adversarial networks (GANs ; Goodfellow et al. 

2014 ), and diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) .Researchers have studied the application of GANs for geomodelling in various 

aspects in recent years (Chen et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2024; Laloy et al., 2018; Mosser et al., 

2020; Nesvold and Mukerji, 2021; Song et al., 2021a, 2021b; Song et al., 2022b, 2022a; 

Zhang et al., 2019) . After training a convolutional neural network model, called a generator, 

alongside another neural network called a discriminator, GANs can produce realistic 

reservoir geomodels by accepting random low -dimensional latent vectors as inputs. To 

further constrain these produced geomodels to given conditioning data, three types of 

methods were proposed: searching appropriate latent vectors that can result in conditional 

geomodels through optimization or sampling methods (e.g., Zhang et al. 2019 ; Nesvold & 

Mukerji, 2021) , training an additional inference network to map another set of low -

dimensional random latent vector s into the appropriate input latent vectors of the trained 

generator (Chan & Elsheikh, 2019) , and training the generator such that it can directly take 

in any given conditioning data – in addition to the random latent vector – and produce 

realistic and conditional reservoir geomodels, as seen in GANSim (S. Song et al., 2021a; S. 

Song, Mukerji, & Hou, 2022) . In recent years, GANSim has been further improved to combine 

with a deep learning -based flow surrogate model for conditioning to dynamic data (S. Song 

et al., 2023) , to integrate a falsification sc he me for modelling multiple geological scenarios, 

and to introduce a local discriminator design for better local realism around well facies data 

(S. Song, Mukerji, et al., 2025) . GANSim has also been applied to the geomodelling of three -

dimensional (3D) stationary -field karst cave reservoirs (Song et al., 2022b) and 3D non -

stationary turbidite and delta reservoirs (Alqassab et al., 2024; S. Song, Mukerji, et al., 2025) .

However, training GANs may encounter difficulties in achieving stable convergence (Saxena 

& Cao, 2021) because it requires balancing the training of the discriminator and the 

generator in an adversarial way. 

Recently, diffusion models have gained momentum in image generation tasks 

(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Yang et al., 2024) , video generation tasks (Xing et al., 2023) , and 

audio generation tasks (Kong et al., 2020) , among others. They have also been largely utilized 

in large artificial intelligence models for image or video generation from texts, such as Sora 

developed by OpenAI in 2014 , DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) , and Stable Diffusion 3 (Esser et al., 2024) . Dhariwal and Nichol (2021) compared diffusion models with GANs, 

demonstrating that the former can produce realistic and diverse images with comparable or 

even better performance than the latter .

There are different versions of diffusion models, such as denoising diffusion 

probabilistic models (DDPM s; Ho et al. 2020) , noise -conditioned score network (Y. Song & 

Ermon, 2019) , and score -based generative modeling (Y. Song et al., 2020) , among which 

DDPM is the most popular one at present. DDPM includes two processes: a fixed Markov 

chain forward process, gradually adding Gaussian noises to a training sample (e.g., a 

picture) through multiple steps to finally form a pure standard Gaussian noise, and a reverse 

process, gradually denoising a pure Gaussian noise through multiple steps to final ly 

generate a data sample (e.g., a picture) which falls inside the distribution of the training 

datasets . During training, using the fixed forward process, a deep learning model (e.g., a 

convolutional neural network, CN N) is trained to predict the data distribution at a step closer 

to the training data (the earlier step), based on the data from the corresponding later step. 

Once trained, iteratively executing that deep learning model step by step would gradually 

transfor m standard Gaussian noise into a data sample within the training dataset 

distribution. DDPM performs all generation steps, which is computationally expensive 

during inference. Therefore, a sampling method called denoising diffusion implicit models 

(DDIM s; Song et al. 2022a ) was proposed to speed up the inference process by skipping 

steps. 

Researchers have applied diffusion models in geoscience problems, including 

geomodelling (Di Federico & Durlofsky, 2024, 2025; Lee et al., 2025) , seismic velocity 

sy nthesis (F. Wang et al., 2024) , and digital rock reconstruction (Luo et al., 2024) . For 

example, Lee et al. (202 5) applied a latent diffusion model proposed by Rombach et al. 

(2022) , to simulate two -dimensional ( 2D ) vertical facies distribution sections for a shoreface 

reservoir, conditioned to well interpretations (as strings of discrete facies codes along 

wells). The “classifier -free guidance” proposed by Ho and Salimans (2022) , as well as an 

additional “preservation” loss comparing the input conditioning well facies data and the 

produced facies model, are used to train the diffusion model to achieve conditioning effect. The preservation loss proved to be one of the key factors for conditioning. The design of the 

preservation loss is nearly identical to the conditioning loss for well facies data in GANSim 

(S. Song et al., 2021a) . However, the geological patterns in the training dataset of Lee et al. 

(202 5) are relatively monotonous, and tuning the weights of different loss terms is required. 

Di Federico and Durlofsky (2024) developed diffusion -based latent parameterizations for 

geomodels and imposed conditioning through flow -based history matching; their 

subsequent work extends this framework to 3D latent diffusion (Di Federico & Durlofsky, 

2025). While effec tive for calibrating models to dynamic (flow) responses, this assimilation -

based conditioning differs from the geomodelling setting emphasized here, where the goal 

is to directly generate facies realizations that honor sparse, hard geological constraints ( well 

facies) as exact local information. 

In this paper, inspired by image inpainting and outpainting techniques proposed by 

Saharia et al. (2022 ), we propose a mask -based conditioning formulation for well facies 

interpretations that treats conditioning as a masked generation problem within the diffusion 

framework. Rather than introducing an explicit preservation loss, the conditioning is 

incorporated through the masking mechanism durin g training and sampling. We evaluate 

this approach on three reservoir types with diverse geological patterns , and the results 

suggest that the method provides a practical and generally applicable way to perform well -

ba sed conditioning in diffusion -model facies geomodelling. The proposed methodology is 

outlined in Section 2. In Section 3, we present the training datasets for the three types of 

reservoirs. In Section 4, the unconditional and conditional generation results obtained with 

the proposed method are presented and analyzed. Finally, Sections 5 and 6 provide the 

discussions and conclusions, respectively. 

2. Geomodelling method based on diffusion models 

In this section, we first briefly introduce the work steps of DDPM and DDIM. Then, we 

show how the two methods are used for unconditional geomodelling (i.e., DDPM for training 

and DDPM/ DDIM for inference). Next, a mask -based conditioning method based on 

diffusion models is proposed for conditional geomodelling on well facies data. 2.1 B rief introduction of DDPM and DDIM 

According to Ho et al. (2020) , the work steps of DDPM are as shown in Table 1. During 

the training stage, first, 𝒙 !, either a two -dimensional image or a three -dimensional cube , is 

randomly selected from the training dataset 𝑞 (𝒙 !). Then, choose a random time step 𝑡 ∈

{1, 2, 3, … , 𝑇 } among all pre -defined time steps involved in the forward or inverse process of 

DDPM. Next, sample a Gaussian noise 𝝐 from 𝑁 (𝟎 , 𝑰 ), where 0 and I are zero and identity 

matrices with the same dimension as a training sample . Fourth, calculate the data of the 

time step t, 𝒙 ", from 𝒙 ! using 

𝒙 " = 5𝑎 7"𝒙 ! + 51 − 𝑎 7"𝝐 , (1) 

where 𝑎 7" = ∏ 𝛼 # 

> #$"
> #$%

, 𝛼 " = 1 − 𝛽 " , and 𝛽 " is a predefined parameter controlling the 

nois e addition schedule for each time step of the forward process. Then, take 𝒙 " and t as 

inputs into a neural network 𝝐 & (𝜃 are the trainable parameters) and train the neural network 

with a loss 

𝐿 = 𝐸 𝒙 !~)(𝒙 !),𝝐 ~ /(𝟎 ,𝑰 ),"~[%,3][||𝝐 − 𝝐 & (𝒙 ", 𝑡 )||5], (2) 

where 𝐸 is the expect ation operation. This neural network 𝝐 & is trained to predict the added 

noise 𝝐 and is often referred to as the denoising network, or simply the noise predictor. 

Finally, repeat the above work steps to train the denoising network 𝝐 & until the loss function 

converges. 

After training, the noise predictor 𝝐 & can be used to sample the intermediate data at 

a previous time step ( 𝒙 "6%) given the data of the later time step ( 𝒙 ") using 

𝒙 "6% = %

> 789"

C𝒙 " − %6:"

> 7%689"

𝝐 & (𝒙 ", 𝑡 )D + 𝜎 "𝒛 , (3)

where 𝜎 " is assumed to be equal to 𝛽 "

> %689"#$
> %689"

, and 𝒛 ~𝑁 (𝟎 , 𝑰 ) has the same dimension 

as the training data. Thus, once a Gaussian noise is sampled at the final time step, i.e., 

𝒙 3~𝑁 (𝟎 , 𝑰 ), then the corresponding 𝒙 ! can be generated by iterative execution of Equation 

(3) in reverse order from the final to the initial time step. The generated 𝒙 ! is expected to fall 

within the training data distribution (Ho et al., 2020) .Table 1. The pseudo -code of the training and inference process of DDPM (adapted from Ho 

et al. (2020) )

Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm 2 Sampling 

1: repeat 1: 𝒙 3~𝑁 (𝟎 , 𝑰 )

2: 𝒙 ! ~ q( 𝒙 !) 2: for t = T, …, 1 do 

3: t ~ Uniform({1, …, T}) 3: if t > 1, 𝒛 ~𝑁 (𝟎 , 𝑰 )

4: 𝝐 ~ 𝑁 (𝟎 , 𝑰 ) 4: else, z = 0

5: 𝒙 " = 5𝑎 7"𝒙 ! + 51 − 𝑎 7"𝝐 5: 𝒙 "6% = %

> 789"

C𝒙 " − %6:"

> 7%689"

𝝐 &(𝒙 ", 𝑡 )D + 𝜎 "𝒛 

6: Train the neural network 𝝐 & with loss 

||𝝐 − 𝝐 &(𝒙 ", 𝑡 )||5

6: end for 

7: until converged 7: return 𝒙 !

Iteratively applying the well -trained noise predictor ( 𝝐 & ) across all time steps is 

computationally expensive during inference. Therefore, the denoising diffusion implicit 

model (DDIM; Song et al. 2022a) was proposed for inference with significantly fewer time 

steps. The derivation of DDIM removes the Markov -chain assumption required in DDPM 

while maintaining the same loss function and training steps as DDPM. The noise predictor 

𝝐 & trained in DDPM can be used for inference in DDIM. The deterministic sampling equation 

used for inference in DDIM is 

𝒙 "6; = 5𝑎 7"6;

> 𝒙 "67%689"𝝐 %(𝒙 ",")
> 789"

+ 51 − 𝑎 7"6;𝝐 &(𝒙 ", 𝑡 ), (4)

where 𝑘 is the number of skipped time steps. More details of the theories about 

DDPM and DDIM can be found in Ho et al. (2020) and Song et al. (2022a). 2.2 Unconditional geomodelling with DDPM and DDIM 

We apply DDPM and DDIM for unconditional geomodelling of three types of 

reservoirs: two in 2D and one in 3D. The 2D reservoirs are discretized into 64×64 cells, 

containing three and four facies categories, respectively. The 3D reservoir is partitioned into 

48×48×32 cells and includes four facies types. The following Data Section provides further 

details on the reservoir and training dataset s. Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of the 

forward ( from geomodel to noise) and the reverse ( from noise to geomodel) processes of 

DDPM involved in unconditional geomodelling. 

Figure 1. A schematic diagram of the forward ( from geomodel to noise) and the reverse ( from 

noise to geomodel) processes of DDPM involved in unconditional geomodelling. 

The architecture of the denoising network 𝝐 & used for unconditional geomodelling in 

this paper essentially follows a U-Net design. Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of 𝝐 & for 

the 2D reservoir cases as an example. It is composed of three encoding blocks (denoted as 

Encoding Block), one middle bottleneck block (denoted as Mid Block), and three decoding 

blocks (denoted as Decoding Block). There is a downsample layer (denoted as Down 

sample) between every two consecutive encoding blocks, and an upsample layer (denoted 

as Up sample) between every two consecutive decoding blocks. A residual block (denoted 

as Res Block) is designed to closely follow the last decoding block. Skip c onnections are 

established between the encoding and decoding blocks at each resolution level. The input 

time step value t is initially processed through a time multi -layer perceptron block (denoted as time MLP) . The output of the perceptron block is processed by time -embedding blocks 

(denoted Time Embedding), and the resulting time -step information is subsequently fed into 

different blocks of the U -Net. The convolutional layers with a 1x1 kernel size , denoted 1x1 

Conv, are inserted to process input and output information. The input and output sizes of 

the U -Net, as well as the sizes of intermediate feature maps after key neural blocks, are 

shown in Figure 2. Further illustrations of the design of each block are illustrated in Appendix 

A. 

Figure 2. The architecture of the noise predictor 𝝐 & employed for unconditional 

geomodelling of the two 2D cases in this paper . Further details of each neural block are 

presented in Appendix A. 

Finally, with the U -net design of the noise predictor 𝝐 & and following the worksteps 

outlined in Table 1, 𝝐 & can be trained and iteratively sampled to produce unconditional 

geomodels with DDPM. For faster inference, DDIM can also be employed. 

2.3 Mask -based conditioning method for well facies data 

To condition on sparse well facies data , a mask -based method is proposed. 

Compared to the previous unconditional geomodelling method, there are two major 

differences. First, the sparse conditioning well facies information is incorporated into the denoising network 𝝐 & through indicator -based encoding. As illustrated in Figure 3, the well 

facies data ( W) are decomposed into multiple facies indicator maps ( 𝑾 <=> )—one for each 

facies category —and one well location indicator map ( m). The well location indicator map 

takes the value of 1 at well locations and 0 elsewhere. Each facies indicator has a value of 1 

if the corresponding facies is present at the well location, and 0 otherwise (i.e. “one -hot 

encoding”). All the intermediate data at different time steps ( 𝒙 ") are masked by the original 

sparse well facies codes ( W) at well locations with 

𝒙 " 

> ?

= (1 − 𝒎 )⨂𝒙 " + 𝒎 ⨂𝑾 , (5)

where ⨂ is the element -wise multiplication operator. The masked intermediate data 

𝒙 "

> ?

, along with 𝑾 <=> and m, is further concatenated and fed into the noise predictor network 

𝝐 & during training. Such an operation, as in Equation ( 5), is referred to as well facies masking 

in this paper. 

Figure 3. The conditional facies simulation using diffusion models incorporat ing conditional indicators and masked intermediate data as inputs. The facies points on the bottom facies 

models are enlarged from 1x1 to 5x5 pixels for visualization purposes .

Second, the loss function is modified to only denoise the between -well region of 𝒙 "

> ?

:

𝐿 @ = 𝐸 𝒙 " 

> &,𝒎 ,𝑾 '() ,𝝐 ,"

L(𝟏 − 𝒎 )⨂N|𝝐 − 𝝐 & (𝒙 "

> ?

, 𝒎 , 𝑾 <=> , 𝑡 )|N5O. (6) 

The loss refers to the difference between the predicted and the true noise only for 

between -well regions . Unlike the method of additional well facies mismatch loss (i.e., the 

“preservation” loss) for conditioning to well facies data in Lee et al. (202 5), this method 

eliminates the need to balance the weights of different loss terms. This leads to a more 

straightforward approach without compromising the realism and conditioning effect of the 

generated geomodels. 

During inference, the conditioning well facies information is injected into the trained 

noise predictor at each time step in the same way as during the training. Following the 

worksteps of DDPM or DDIM, the final facies realizations that align with expected geol ogical 

patterns and the input well facies data can be generated. 

3. Data 

Three datasets of channel reservoir model s are utilized to evaluate the geomodelling 

performance of the proposed diffusion model methods, both in unconditional and 

conditional scenarios . The first dataset is constructed by Song et al. (2021a) using object -

based modeling in the Petrel platform, and is referred to as the channel reservoir data. 

Figure 4a shows several facies model examples with diverse channel orientation, sinuosity ,

and facies proportion across different models . There are three classes of facies: channel 

sand, channel bank , and inter -channel mud . Each facies model consists of multiple 

channels with similar geometric features, such as channel orientation, width, and sinuosity. 

The dimension of e ach facies model is 64 x 64 cells, with each cell representing an area of 

50 x 50 m. T he entire facies model dataset is split into a training set of 32,640 samples and a test set of 3,000 samples. We randomly sampled 3 to 32 well locations, each with a 1x1 

cell, from each facies model to serve as conditioning well facies data. Some examples of 

facies models and the corresponding well facies data are presented in Figures 4a and 4b. 

Figure 4. Some facies model examples of the channel reservoir data. a) presents facies 

models, while b) illustrates the corresponding well facies data. There are three types of 

facies: channel sand (yellow), channel bank ( teal ), and inter -channel mud (purple ). The well 

facies points in b) are enlarged from 1x1 pixel s to 5x5 cells in this figure for better 

visualization. 

The second facies model dataset used in this paper was created by Hu et al. (2024) 

and includes four facies types : abandoned channel, lateral accretion sand , mud drape , and 

floodplain. It is referred to as the point bar reservoir data. Illustrative examples of facies 

models and the corresponding well facies data are shown in Figures 5a and 5b, respectively .

Each facies model consists of 64 x 64 cell s, where each cell corresponds to 10 x 10 m. These 

data pairs are divided into a traini ng data set including 10 ,000 data samples and a test data 

set including 1700 data samples. W e randomly selected 4 to 31 well locations, each with a 

1x1 cell, from each facies model as the cond itioning well facies data. Figure 5. Some examples of the point bar reservoir dataset. a) presents facies models, while 

b) illustrates the corresponding well facies data. There are four types of facies: channel fill 

(sea green ), lateral accretion sand (yellow), mud drape s (dark blue), and floodplain (purple). 

The well facies points in b) are enlarged from 1x1 pixel s to 5x5 pixels in this figure for better 

visualization. 

The third dataset used in this study originates from 200 3D meandering channel 

models generated by Hu et al. (2024) . Each model consists of 200 ×200 ×160 cells along the 

x, y, and z direction s with a resolution of 10 ×10 ×0.1 m. They have the same facies classes 

as the previous point bar dataset. We randomly select 190 out of the 200 models to 

construct a training data set, while reserving the remaining 10 for testing. By randomly 

cropping along abandoned channel facies, we get 12,000 facies model patches, each 

containing 48x48x32 cells, in the training dataset and 500 patches in the test dataset. From 

each facies -model patc h, we randomly select between 3 and 31 well locations to serve as 

conditioning data. Each well is represented as a vertical column of size 1x1x32 containing 

facies codes. Some examples of the facies model patches and the corresponding well 

facies data are displayed in Figure 6, where the floodplain facies are omitted in the first two 

rows for improved visualization. Figure 6. Examples from the 3D point -bar dataset. Panel a) shows an original 3D facies 

model, and panel b) shows four extracted training samples (top row) along with the 

corresponding well facies data (bottom row). 

4. Results and analyses 

4.1 Unconditional geomodelling 

4.1.1 Channel reservoir case 

The architecture of the noise predictor network is presented in Figure 2. F ollowing the 

training procedure outlined in Table 1, we train the noise predictor network by using the 

Adam optimizer , with a batch size of 256 , and 1500 denoising iteration steps. The denoising -

step setting is selected based on an ablation study (Section 5), as it significantly impacts 

facies generation performance. The entire training process, spanning 300 epochs and 

approximately 38,000 mini -batch iterations, takes about 8 hours to complete in a single 

Nvidia A100 GPU with 80G of memory . The original and smoothed loss curves presented in 

Figure 7 indicate that the training converge s well . Based on this we select the model with the 

lowest epoch loss for inference. After training, the noise predict or network is expected to 

capture the geological patterns embedded in the training samples and can be applied to 

generate realistic geomodels .Figure 7. The evolution of both the original and smoothed loss values over iteration steps 

during the training of the noise predictor network. 

Based on the trained noise predictor, Equation ( 3) (if using DDPM ) and Equation (4) 

(if using DDIM ) are iteratively performed from the last time step to the initial time step to 

generate a geomodel from a pure Gaussian noise map. Figure 8 shows the DDPM inference 

results for the time steps 1, 700, 1000, 1400, and 1500 for three random Gaussian noise 

maps . When using DDIM for inference, we set the skipped time step number (k in Equation 

(4)) as 30, so a total of 50 iterations of executions of Equation (4) ar e required. Figure 9

presents DDIM results after different execution iterations for three random Gaussian inputs. 

From the three randomly selected generation processes in Figures 8 and 9, we can see that 

DDPM and DDIM both can progressively generate realistic facies models from pure 

Gaussian noise maps . The average inference time for each geomodel is about 0.8 seconds 

for DDPM and 0.029 seconds for DDIM , respectively , with DDIM giving an order of magnitude 

speed -up during inference . Further details regardi ng the setting of training time steps are 

provided in the discussion section. Figure 8. The sampled outputs of the iterations 1, 700, 1000, 1400, and the final 1500 with 

three different Gaussian noise maps as the initial inputs following the DDPM inference 

procedure. 

Figure 9. The sampled outputs of iterations 1, 20, 30, 40, and the final 50 with three different 

Gaussian noise maps as the initial inputs following the DDIM inference procedure. In each 

iteration, 30 time steps are skipped. To further investigate generation performance quantitatively, we simulate two sets of 

12,000 facies models using both DDPM and DDIM, respectively, and compare their 

distributions with that of the 3000 test set facies models. Since each model is a high -

dimensional object, the comparison in done by projecting the models to a 2D space based 

on multidimensional scaling (MDS ; Borg and Groenen, 2005) using a multi -scale sliced -

Wasserstein distance (MS -SWD ; Karras et al., 2017) . It includes two steps: first, we divide 

the test and the generated facies models into multiple groups each containing 100 facies 

models; then, calculate the MS -SWD between every two facies model group s of the test set 

and the generated realizations of either DDPM or DDIM, and finally, project these facies 

model groups onto a two -dimensional MDS space based on the calculated MS -SWD matrix 

with each group represented by a point. More detail s of this combined method are described 

in Song et al. (2021a) . The projected facies model groups are visualized using scatter plots 

and density plots in Figure 10 for DDPM and Figure 11 for DDIM. The strong consistency 

between the generated and test facies model distributions demonstrates that both DDPM 

and DDIM can effectively capture the underlying spatial geological patterns of the training 

geological models .

Figure 10. Multidimensional scaling plot of the test set and realizations generated using 

DDPM with 1500 time steps. ‘TS ’ (timesteps) in the legends denotes the total number of 

timesteps for diffusion model training. The left panel shows a scatter plot, while the right 

panel presents a density plot of the MDS projections. Figure 11. Multidimensional scaling plot of the test set and realizations generated using 

DDIM with 50 sampling steps. 

We further compare the generated results with the test dataset using facies 

proportion distributions, variograms, and channel geometric features. Figure 12 compares 

the facies proportion histograms of the three facies types ( inter -channel mud, channel bank, 

and channel sand facies) of the test dataset, including 3000 facies models, as well as the 

generated realizations from DDPM and DDIM, each including 3,000 samples. The 

histograms of the generated facies models match those of the test dat aset very well .

Figure 12. The class distribution comparison of three types of facies between the test set 

and the generated realizations generated by DDPM and DDIM . a) -c) compare the class 

distribution s of the inter -channel mud, channel bank , and channel sand, respectively. We also randomly selected 400 facies models from the test set, DDPM -generated 

and DDIM -generated realizations, respectively, and computed the variograms of each 

selected facies model along four directions – 0°, 45°, 90°, and 135° in a clockwise direction 

from the north. Figure 13 shows the distributions of these calculated variograms. The solid 

and dashed curves are the mean of the 400 variograms of the 400 test and generated facies 

models , while the shaded regions show the range between the 10th and 90th p ercentiles of 

the 400 variograms. We can see that the variograms of the generated facies models match 

very well with those of the test ones. 

Figure 13. The variogram comparison along four directions between 400 random geomodels 

from the test set and 400 random realizations generated from a) DDPM and b) DDIM. The 

solid or dashed lines represent the mean value of 400 variograms, while the shaded area 

surrounding the mean value curve signifies the range between the 10th and 90th percentiles 

of 400 variograms .

We further compare the distributions of the channel length, sinuosity, and width 

between the generated and the test facies models. For each facies model, we select only 

the longest channel to measure these geometric features. Sinuosity is calculated as the 

actual channel length divided by the straight -line distance between the two endpoints of the channel (Fuller et al., 2013) . The geometric feature distribution s (as cumulative density 

functions) of 3000 test facies models and 3000 realizations from DDPM and DDIM are 

compared in Figure 14. The geometric feature distributions of the DDPM -generated facies 

models are closer to those of the test facies models than the DDIM -generated results .

Nonetheless, both DDPM and DDIM exhibit overall distributions that are largely consistent 

with the test dataset. 

Figure 14. The geometric features comparison between the test set and the generated 

realizations from DDPM and DDIM. a) -c) display the distribution of channel length, channel 

sinuosity, and channel width. 

Based on the above evaluation of the generated geomodels across various metrics, 

we find that diffusion models, both DDPM and DDIM, are capable of producing realistic and 

diverse geomodels. Notably, DDIM offers comparable geomodel quality to DDPM but with 

largely reduced inference time, making it a more efficient option for generating geomodels. 

4.1.2 P oint bar reservoir case 

Using the same hyperparameter settings, neural network architecture, and training 

procedures as in the previous channel -reservoir scenario, we train the network for the point -

bar case for 11 hours on an Nvidia A100 GPU. Then, the trained noise predictor ne twork can 

be used for unconditional geomodelling. We generate 6,000 facies models using both DDPM 

(15 00 denoising steps) and DDIM (50 sampling steps, skipping 30 steps between successive steps). Figures 1 5a and 1 5b present random realizations generated by DDPM and DDIM, 

respectively. Figures 1 5c and 1 5d present scatter and density plots, respectively, comparing 

the overall data distributions of the generated facies models and the test data using the 

combined MS -SWD and MDS method. The results demonstrate that both DDPM and DDIM 

are effective in generati ng geomodels that closely resemble the test facies models in terms 

of realism and diversity. Regarding data distribution in Figures 15c -15d , DDPM achieves 

relatively better performance than DDIM, albeit with increased computational time, 

possibly due to the larger number of inference iterations. Figure 15. Unconditional realizations of the point bar reservoir geomodels generated using 

a) DDPM with 1500 time steps and b) DDIM with 50 sampling steps . The c) scatter plot and 

d) density plot illustrate data comparisons between the test samples and the generated 

ones with DDPM and DDIM. 

4.1.3 Three -dimensional p oint bar reservoir case 

For the 3D case, we adopt a U -Net architecture for the denoising generative model, 

following the same overall design as in the 2D experiments. As illustrated in Figures 2 and 

A1, the 3D U -Net retains the same building blocks and connectivity (e.g., residua l blocks, 

attention modules, skip connections, and time conditioning), with all 2D convolutional 

layers replaced by their 3D counterparts to accommodate volumetric inputs. Other settings 

and procedures remain the same as the 2D cases, and the batch size i s reduced to 32 due 

to GPU memory constraints. The denoising network is trained for 152 epochs, requiring 

approximately 20 hours on a single Nvidia A100 GPU. Following training, DDPM (with 1500 

time steps) and DDIM (50 skip steps with each skip 30 time steps) are employed to generate 

the unconditional facies models, which are shown in Figure 16. Figure 16. Unconditional realizations of 3D point bar reservoir case, generated using a) 

DDPM with 1500 time steps and b) DDIM with 50 sampling steps . The c) scatter plot and d) 

density plot illustrate data comparisons between test geomodels and the generated ones 

produced from DDPM and DDIM. 

The data distribution comparisons in Figure 16 c-d are conducted using 50 test 

geomodel patches, 50 DDPM -generated ones, and 50 DDIM -generated samples. Whether compared based on visual inspection or distributions in MDS plots, the generated 

realizations present consistent spatial features to the test samples, indicating the 

effectiveness of the diffusion model -based geomodelling method for 3D reservoir cases. 

The inference time for DDPM (1500 denoising steps) is 3.5 minutes when sampling with a 

batch size of 8 running on a n Nvidia A100 GPU , whereas DDIM (50 sampling steps) requires 

only 6.8 seconds under the same conditions. 

4.2 Conditional facies modeling using the mask -based conditioning method 

The proposed mask -based well facies conditioning method is validated using the two 

2D datasets and the one 3D dataset. For the 2D cases, we use the architecture illustrated in 

Figure 2, combined with the mask -based conditioning approach for well facies data 

described in Figure 3, to train the denoising network. The number of denoising steps is set 

to 1500, and the batch size is set to 64. The training of the denoising network takes 

approximately 24 hours on a single Nvidia A100 GPU with 80 GB of memory in b oth 2D cases. 

After training, we utilize the trained denoising network for conditional geomodelling in the 

way of DDIM. In the 3D case, the same well facies mask -based method is integrated into the 

architecture of the unconditional scenario. We train the denoising network for 

approximately 32 hours on four Nvidia A100 GPUs . After training, both DDPM and DDIM can 

be used for conditional geomodelling using the trained denoising network. For conciseness, 

we provide the DDPM conditional results for three scenarios in the Supporting Information 

(Figures S1 –S3) , and we focus on DDIM in the main text .

4.2.1 Channel reservoir case 

To explore the diversity of the generated realizations and assess the conditioning 

capability of the proposed method, we randomly select eight test facies models and use 

the ir extracted well facies data to generate 100 facies model realizations for each of the test 

facies models by varying the input Gaussian noise map. The results are illustrated in Figure 

17. Each row of Figure 1 7 includes the test facies model , the corresponding input well facies 

data , six randomly generated geomodels, and the frequency m aps of three facies types 

calculated from the 100 generated realizations . We can see from Figure 17 that, n o matter how many conditioning wells there are, all generated facies models exhibit geological 

features comparable to those of the training dataset and condition to the input well facies 

data accurately. When constrained by fewer wells, such as the top three examples of Figure 

17, the facies fr equency map s globally exhibit a blurry and smooth feature except around 

well locations. This indicate s that the generated facies model realizations possess sufficient 

diversity —e.g., all directions of generated channels. As the conditioning well number 

increases, as in the bottom five examples of Figure 17, well facies data interact with one 

another, thereby reducing the overall diversity of the generated facies models. 

Upon visual inspection of the 800 realizations generated for the eight geomodeling 

cases in Figure 17, we observe that a small proportion (approximately 0.25%) of the 

generated facies models exhibit artifacts in the form of channel discontinuities, deviating 

from the continuous channel patterns present in the training dataset. Figure 18 illustrates 

two such examples , where the white arrows indicate the locations of channel 

disconnenctions in the generated realizations. Figure 17. The generated realizations using conditional diffusion models with the different 

well facies data as constraints. Each row includes a facies model sampled from the test set, 

the corresponding well facies data, six generated realizations, and the frequency maps of 

the three facies types calculated from 100 realizations. The well facies points in the second 

column are enlarged from 1x1 pixels to 5x5 pixels for better visualization purposes in this 

figure .

Figure 18. Two generated realizations exhibiting channel discontinuity artifacts . White arrows indicate the locations where channel continuity is not preserved. 

For the bottom two cases in Figure 17, we compare the reference d test facies model 

with the distributions of 100 random conditional realizations and 100 random unconditional 

realizations in a two -dimensional space using the combined MS -SWD and MDS method. The 

MDS plots are shown in Figure 19. T hree conditional realizations with the largest , medium, 

and the low est similarities (measured by the Euclidean distance in the two -dimensional 

MDS space) to the reference facies models are marked in yellow in the MDS plot s. The light -

blue points representing conditional models in Figure 19 cluster around the reference 

models (red crosses) relative to the unconditional model distributions (gray points), 

indicating that the input well -facies data impose an important constraint on the resulting 

geological patterns .Figure 19. The MDS plots of the referenced test facies models, along with the conditional 

and unconditional generated realizations for two test cases. The three conditional 

realizations with the largest, medium, and the lowest similarities to the reference facies 

mo dels are marked by yellow dots in the MDS plot and the respective conditional 

realizations and illustrated on the sides. 

4.2.2 P oint bar reservoir case 

For the point bar reservoir case, the same procedures as in the channel case are 

followed to generate 100 realizations using the well facies data of eight random test facies 

models, as shown in Figure 20. The frequency maps of the four facies are calculated from 

100 conditional realizations (the last four columns of Figure 20). With fewer input well facies points, the generated facies model realizations exhibit substantial diversity and geological 

realism, as evidenced by both the realizations themselves and the corresponding frequency 

maps (e.g., the top two rows in Figure 20). As the number of input well f acies points 

increases, however, the realizations become progressively more constrained, and the 

overall diversity decreases. The reproduction accuracy of the input well facies data is 100% 

based on an evaluati on of 800 conditional realizations across 8 ca ses in Figure 20. This 

demonstrates that the conditional generation process of DDIM can effectively constrain the 

geomodels to well facies data while maintaining the expected realism and diversity. 

Figure 20. Conditional realizations generated from diffusion models with the different well 

facies data as constraints. Each row includes a geomodel from the test set, the 

corresponding well facies data , five randomly generated realizations, and frequency maps 

of the four facies types calculated from 100 realizations. The well facies points in the second 

column are enlarged from 1x1 pixels to 5x5 pixels for better visualization. 4.2.3 Three -dimensional p oint bar reservoir case 

In this case, a 3D U -Net neural network is trained for denoising generative purposes, 

which is subsequently employed for conditional geomodelling following the DDIM inference 

workflow. Figure 21 presents the geomodelling results obtained using different t est well 

facies data as conditioning input. Each row displays a test facies model , the corresponding 

input well facies, four randomly generated realizations, and the frequency and variance 

maps of the channel facies assemblage, including mud drapes, channe l fill, and lateral 

accretion sand fa ci es. The given well facies are reproduced with 100% accuracy in the 

examples of Figure 21 . As shown in Figure 21, all generated realizations appear geologically 

realistic. With fewer input well facies data, the realizations exhibit substantial diversity, as 

reflected in both the realizations themselves and the corresponding frequency and varian ce 

maps in the top three rows. As the amount of input well facies data increases, however, the 

diversity of realizations gradually decreases, as evidenced by the progressi vely more certain 

features in the probability and variance maps from the fourth to the sixth rows. 

Figure 21. Conditional realizations generated from diffusion models with different known 

facies as constraints. Each row includes a geomodel from the test set, randomly assumed known facies, four out of 100 realizations, and generated variance and probability maps of 

the river facies. 

We observe that denoising diffusion models trained on the 3D dataset converge more 

slowly than those trained on the 2D dataset. Achieving strong performance takes 

approximately 32 hours of training on four A100 GPUs. We attribute this slower convergence 

to the increased difficulty of simultaneously honoring sparse well facies data and capturing 

complex 3D spatial geological patterns. The inference time for a single 3D facies model 

realization is a pproximately 2.08 s. To further improve generation efficiency during 

inference, latent diffusion models will be explored in future work. 

5. Discussion 

5.1 Comparing different training time steps for DDPM and DDIM 

The total number of time steps in diffusion models may influence the generation 

realism, diversity, and training and inference time . To explore that influence, we investigate 

the generation results by setting the total time step number to 500, 1000, and 1500, 

respectively. The training times across different time -step settings are comparable in the 

channel -reservoir case, as demonstrated in Section 4. In contrast, the inference time 

increases proportionally with the time steps involved. Specifically, the in ference times per 

realization are approximately 0.26, 0.53, and 0.8 seconds for 500, 1000, and 1500 time 

steps, respectively. Figure 22 shows randomly generated facies models produced by DDPM 

for the three time -step settings. The figure shows that the generated facies models are 

realistic and diverse across all three settings . However, when the results are projected into 

2D plots with the combined method of MS -SWD and MDS (Figure 23), we see obvious 

distribution discrepancy between the 500 time step results and the test facies models, while 

the facies model distributions of the 1000 and 1500 time step results almost overlap with 

that of the test facies models. The reason may be that the difference between the hidden data distributions of adjacent time steps becomes smaller with increasing time steps, thus 

making the noise predictor easier to learn the mapping between those data distributions. 

Figure 22. Random realizations are generated from DDPM when the total time steps are set 

as a) 500, b) 1000, and c) 1500. ‘TS ’ in the labels denotes the total number of time steps used 

for training the diffusion model. Figure 23. Multidimensional scaling plot of the test set and realizations generated using 

DDPM with 500, 1000, and 1500 time steps. ‘TS ’ in the legends refers to the total time steps 

for diffusion model training. 

We further investigate the generation results using DDIM for the three time step 

settings. The number of skipped time steps is set as 10, 20, and 30 for the three cases, 

respectively. Figure 24 shows random generation results for the three settings, and Figure 

25 shows the MDS plots of generated results and test facies models. A mode collapse can 

be clearly seen from the 500 time step results, since all the generated facies models exhibit 

a high proportion of mud facies, which is inconsistent with the train ing/test dataset. In MDS 

plots, the 500 and the 1000 time step results are away from the test facies models, while the 

1500 time step results match well with the test ones. One possible explanation is that 

increasing the number of training time steps may enhance the noise predictor network’s 

performance, thereby reducing errors in the reverse diffusion process. This reduction in 

error could potentially fac ilitate the use of accelerated sampling algorithms, such as DDIM, 

by decreasing the likelihood of cumul ative errors throughout the sampling process. 

Therefore, we recommend using relatively large total time steps for model training, even if 

we perform only a small number of iterations during inference. Figure 24. Random realizations are generated from DDIM when the total training time steps 

are set as a) 500, b) 1000, and c) 1500, but only 50 iterations are utilized at the inference 

stage. Figure 25. Multidimensional scaling plot of the test set and realizations generated using 

DDIM with 500, 1000, and 1500 time steps. ‘TS ’ in the legends refers to the total time steps 

for diffusion model training. 

5.2 Construct large geomodels from pre -trained denoising diffusion models 

The trained diffusion models are not limited to generating models of only the same 

size as used during training, but can generate larger geomodels conditioned on denser well 

facies data. Because the fully convolutional neural network design is used in the noise 

predictor network, the trained model can be extended for geomodelling of arbitrarily large 

reservoirs as long as the size of the input Gaussian noise map and the output size of the 

geomodel remain the same. This fully convolutional property has also been exploited to 

scale GAN -based conditional geomodelling to larger 3D reservoirs (S. Song, Mukerji, et al., 

2025; S. Song, Mukerji, Hou, et al., 2022) . For the meandering 2D case, w e applied the 

trained diffusion model (trained on 64 x 64 training set samples) to generate 128×128 -pixel 

reservoirs, using 50 randomly selected well facies points as input. Note that during training, 

3 to 32 conditioning points for the well facies are considered in each 64x64 -cell. Figure 26

shows the input well facies points and three randomly generated facies models. The large -

scale realizations preserve geological structures consistent with the training facies models 

and h onor the conditioning wells exactly (100% honor rate at well locations). Figure 2 7shows the large -size generated results conditioned on 80 well facies points for the point bar 

reservoir case . These three re alizations are distinct , but both are conditioned on the given 

well facies . Figure 28 shows the large -size generated results with 128x128x64 cells, (trained 

on 48 x 48 x 32) which reproduce the input well facies data with 100% accuracy and are 

consistent with the geological patterns embedded in the 3D point bar facies models. 

Figure 26. 2D meandering case. Conditioning wells and three realizations generated by the 

diffusion model under the same well facies constraints . Generated models are not limited 

to the size (64x64) used during training, but can generate larger model sizes (e.g. 128 x128). 

Figure 27. 2D point -bar case. Conditioning wells and three realizations generated by the 

diffusion model under the same well facies constraints . Generated models are not limited 

to the size (64x64) used during training, but can generate larger model sizes (e.g. 128 x128). Figure 28. 3D point -bar case. Conditioning wells and three 3D realizations generated by the 

diffusion model under the same well facies constraints. Generated models are not limited 

to the size (48 x 48 x 32) used during training, but can generate larger model sizes (e.g. 128 

x128 x 64 ). 

6. Conclusions 

We investigate denoising diffusion generative models for both unconditional 

sampling and geomodelling conditioned on well facies data, and evaluate their performance 

on three reservoir scenarios (two 2D cases and one 3D case) . Across these scenarios, the 

trained diffusion model produce s realistic, diverse facies realizations that match the test 

set across multiple statistics, including MDS distribution, facies proportions, variograms, 

and geometric features, demonstrating its ability to effectively capture realistic geological 

patterns . For conditional geomodelling, we propose a mask -based strategy that updates 

only inter -well regions while keeping the known well facies fixed during sampling, enabling 

hard conditioning without introducing additional loss reweighting. This framework enable s

uncertainty quantification by generating multiple conditioned realizations under hard well 

constraints. In addition, t he trained diffusion model s can be extended to conditional 

geomodelling of moderately large reservoirs wh ile conditioning on a larger number of wells .

Improving the training and inference efficiency of 3D diffusion models will be a focus of our 

future work .

Acknowledgments We would like to acknowledge the sponsors of the Stanford Center for Earth Resources 

Forecasting (SCERF) for their support. Some of the computing for this project was performed 

on the Sherlock cluster. We would like to thank Stanford University and the Sta nford 

Research Computing Center for providing computational resources and support that 

contributed to these research results. 

Use of AI Tools 

All content and figures in this manuscript were conceived, developed, and prepared by the 

authors. AI tools were used only for language editing and stylistic refinement. The authors 

take full responsibility for the accuracy, integrity, and presentation of the manuscript. 

Open Research 

The data and code used to train and run inference with the diffusion models are publicly 

available via Zenodo (Xu et al., 2026) and the project GitHub repository 

(https://github.com/minghuix98/DiffSim) 

Conflict of Interest Disclosure 

The authors declare there are no conflicts of interest for this manuscript. 

APPENDIX A: : Details of the Noise Predictor Network 

This section provide s a concise overview of the architecture of the applied noise 

predictor network, following the discussion of Figure 2. Each encoding block consists of two 

consecutive residual blocks (denoted as Res Block), followed by a group normalization layer 

(denoted as Group norm) (Wu & He, 2018) and a linear attention layer (denoted as Linear 

Attention) (Shen et al., 2021) , which is depicted in Figure A1 a. A skip connection is 

established between the output of the second residual block and the output of the linear attention layer within the encoding blocks. Following the first and the second encoding 

blocks, downsampling layers are introduced to reduce both spatial dimensions by half, 

while simultaneously doubling the number of image channels, consistent with the st andard 

U-Net architecture. The residual blocks employ a Wide ResNet block, as introduced by 

Zagoruyko (2016) , in which the standard convolutional layer is replaced by a weight -

standardized convolutional layer (denoted as WS Conv). The Res Block of Figure A1f 

includes two sub -blocks in which the time embedding information is integrated into the 

layer denoted as ‘Scale & Shift’ in the first block, which will be further described in the next 

paragraph. The SiLU within two sub -blocks both represent applying the S igmoid Linear Unit 

(SiLU) activation function (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) . The third encoding block transitions 

into the hidden mid -block, which comprises a 3x3 convolutional layer (denoted as 3x3 

Conv), two residual blocks, and an interposed attention layer (Vaswani et al., 2023) , as 

illustrated in Figure A1 c. The decoding block adopts the same architecture as the encoding 

block, with two skip connections linking the corresponding encoding and decoding blocks. 

The specific components are detailed in Figure A1 b. 

For temporal information processing, the time MLP block, as shown in Figure A1 d, 

consists of a sinusoidal embedding for positional encoding (Vaswani et al., 2023) , followed 

by a linear layer, a Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU; Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016) activation 

function, and another linear layer for output. The time embedding block, depicted in Figure 

A1 e, incorporates a SiLU activation function and a linear layer for output. After being 

processed by the time MLP and time embedding layers, the specific time step is transformed 

into embedded time information, which serves as the input to the residual blocks, as 

indicated by the light blue arrows. Figure A1. The specific components of different blocks: a) Encoding Block, b) Decoding 

Block, c) Mid Block, d) Time MLP, e) Time embedding, f) Res Block. 

References 

Alqassab, H. M., Feng, M., Becker, J. A., Song, S., & Mukerji, T. (2024). MAGCS: Machine 

Assisted Geologic Carbon Storage (p. D021S044R001). Presented at the ADIPEC. 

https://doi.org/10.2118/222120 -MS 

Bond -Taylor, S., Leach, A., Long, Y., & Willcocks, C. G. (2022). Deep generative modelling: A 

comparative review of VAEs, GANs, normalizing flows, energy -based and 

autoregressive models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 

Intelligence , 44 (11), 7327 –7347. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3116668 Borg, I., & Groenen, P. J. F. (Eds.). (2005). MDS Models and Measures of Fit. In Modern 

Multidimensional Scaling: Theory and Applications (pp. 37 –61). New York, NY: 

Springer New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/0 -387 -28981 -X_3 

Bosch, M., Mukerji, T., & Gonzalez, E. F. (2010). Seismic inversion for reservoir properties 

combining statistical rock physics and geostatistics: A review. Geophysics , 75 (5), 

75A165 -75A176. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.3478209 

Chan, S., & Elsheikh, A. H. (2019). Parametric generation of conditional geological 

realizations using generative neural networks. Computational Geosciences , 23 (5), 

925 –952. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10596 -019 -09850 -7

Chen, J., Huang, C. -K., Delgado, J. F., & Misra, S. (2023). Generating subsurface earth 

models using discrete representation learning and deep autoregressive network. 

Computational Geosciences , 27 (6), 955 –974. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10596 -023 -

10243 -0

Cui, Z., Chen, Q., Liu, G., & Xun, L. (2024). SA -RelayGANs: A novel framework for the 

characterization of complex hydrological structures based on GANs and self -

attention mechanismScaling. Water Resources Research , 60 (1), e2023WR035932. 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2023WR035932 

Dhariwal, P., & Nichol, A. (2021). Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances 

in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34 , 8780 –8794. 

Di Federico, G., & Durlofsky, L. J. (2024). Latent diffusion models for parameterization and 

data assimilation of facies -based geomodels. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14815 .

Di Federico, G., & Durlofsky, L. J. (2025). Three -Dimensional Latent Diffusion Models for 

Parameterizing and History Matching Facies Systems Under Hierarchical Uncertainty. 

Mathematical Geosciences , 1 –33. 

Esser, P., Kulal, S., Blattmann, A., Entezari, R., Müller, J., Saini, H., et al. (2024, March 5). 

Scaling rectified flow Transformers for high -resolution image synthesis. arXiv. 

Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.03206 Fuller, I., Reid, H., & Brierley, G. (2013). Methods in geomorphology: investigating river 

channel form. In Treatise on geomorphology: Methods in geomorphology (pp. 73 –91). 

Elsevier. 

Goodfellow, I., Pouget -Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde -Farley, D., Ozair, S., et al. (2014). 

Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems 

(Vol. 27). 

Hendrycks, D., & Gimpel, K. (2016). Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv Preprint 

arXiv:1606.08415 .

Ho, J., & Salimans, T. (2022, July 25). Classifier -free diffusion guidance. arXiv. Retrieved from 

http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.12598 

Ho, J., Jain, A., & Abbeel, P. (2020). Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in 

Neural Information Processing Systems , 33 , 6840 –6851. 

Hu, X., Song, S., Hou, J., Yin, Y., Hou, M., & Azevedo, L. (2024). Stochastic modeling of thin 

mud drapes inside point bar reservoirs with ALLUVSIM -GANSim. Water Resources 

Research , 60 (6), e2023WR035989. https://doi.org/10.1029/2023WR035989 

Karras, T., Aila, T., Laine, S., & Lehtinen, J. (2017). Progressive growing of GANs for improved 

quality, stability, and variation. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1710.10196 .

Kingma, Diederik P, & Welling, M. (2013). Auto -encoding variational bayes. arXiv Preprint 

arXiv:1312.6114 .

Kingma, Durk P, & Dhariwal, P. (2018). Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 

convolutions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 31 .

Kong, Z., Ping, W., Huang, J., Zhao, K., & Catanzaro, B. (2020). Diffwave: A versatile diffusion 

model for audio synthesis. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761 .

Laloy, E., Hérault, R., Jacques, D., & Linde, N. (2018). Training -image based geostatistical 

inversion using a spatial generative adversarial neural network. Water Resources 

Research , 54 (1), 381 –406. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017WR022148 Lee, D., Ovanger, O., Eidsvik, J., Aune, E., Skauvold, J., & Hauge, R. (2025). Latent diffusion 

model for conditional reservoir facies generation. Computers & Geosciences , 194 ,

105750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2024.105750 

Luo, X., Sun, J., Zhang, R., Chi, P., & Cui, R. (2024). A multi -condition denoising diffusion 

probabilistic model controls the reconstruction of 3D digital rocks. Computers & 

Geosciences , 184 , 105541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2024.105541 

Mosser, L., Dubrule, O., & Blunt, M. J. (2020). Stochastic seismic waveform inversion using 

generative adversarial networks as a geological prior. Mathematical Geosciences ,

52 (1), 53 –79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11004 -019 -09832 -6

Nesvold, E., & Mukerji, T. (2021). Simulation of fluvial patterns with GANs trained on a data 

set of satellite imagery. Water Resources Research , 57 (5), e2019WR025787. 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2019WR025787 

Oliver, M. A., & Webster, R. (2014). A tutorial guide to geostatistics: Computing and 

modelling variograms and kriging. CATENA , 113 , 56 –69. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2013.09.006 

Ramesh, A., Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A., Chu, C., & Chen, M. (2022). Hierarchical text -

conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2204.06125 , 1(2), 

3. 

Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., & Ommer, B. (2022). High -resolution 

image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (pp. 10674 –10685). IEEE. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01042 

Saharia, C., Chan, W., Chang, H., Lee, C., Ho, J., Salimans, T., et al. (2022). Palette: image -

to -image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings .

Vancouver, BC, Canada: Association for Computing Machinery. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3528233.3530757 Saxena, D., & Cao, J. (2021). Generative adversarial networks (GANs): challenges, solutions, 

and future directions. ACM Comput. Surv. , 54 (3). https://doi.org/10.1145/3446374 

Shen, Z., Zhang, M., Zhao, H., Yi, S., & Li, H. (2021). Efficient attention: Attention with linear 

complexities. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of 

computer vision (pp. 3531 –3539). 

Song, J., Meng, C., & Ermon, S. (2022, October 5). Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv. 

Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502 

Song, S., Mukerji, T., & Hou, J. (2021a). GANSim: Conditional facies simulation using an 

improved progressive growing of generative adversarial networks (GANs). 

Mathematical Geosciences , 53 (7), 1413 –1444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11004 -021 -

09934 -0

Song, S., Mukerji, T., & Hou, J. (2021b). Geological facies modeling based on progressive 

growing of generative adversarial networks (GANs). Computational Geosciences ,

25 (3), 1251 –1273. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10596 -021 -10059 -w

Song, S., Mukerji, T., & Hou, J. (2022). Bridging the gap between geophysics and geology with 

generative adversarial networks. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote 

Sensing , 60 , 1 –11. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2021.3066975 

Song, S., Mukerji, T., Hou, J., Zhang, D., & Lyu, X. (2022). GANSim -3D for conditional 

geomodeling: theory and field application. Water Resources Research , 58 (7), 

e2021WR031865. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021WR031865 

Song, S., Zhang, D., Mukerji, T., & Wang, N. (2023). GANSim -surrogate: An integrated 

framework for stochastic conditional geomodelling. Journal of Hydrology , 620 ,

129493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2023.129493 

Song, S., Huang, J., & Mukerji, T. (2025). Generative geomodelling: Deep Learning vs. 

Geostatistics. https://doi.org/10.31223/X5B732 Song, S., Mukerji, T., Scheidt, C., Alqassab, H., & Feng, M. (2025). Geomodelling of multi -

scenario non -stationary reservoirs with enhanced GANSim. 

https://doi.org/10.31223/X5Z73N 

Song, Y., & Ermon, S. (2019). Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data 

distribution. In Advances in neural information processing systems (Vol. 32). 

Song, Y., Sohl -Dickstein, J., Kingma, D. P., Kumar, A., Ermon, S., & Poole, B. (2020). Score -

based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv Preprint 

arXiv:2011.13456 .

Strebelle, S. (2002). Conditional simulation of complex geological structures using multiple -

point statistics. Mathematical Geology , 34 (1), 1–21. 

https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1014009426274 

Tahmasebi, P. (2018). Multiple point statistics: A review. In B. S. Daya Sagar, Q. Cheng, & F. 

Agterberg (Eds.), Handbook of Mathematical Geosciences: Fifty Years of IAMG (pp. 

613 –643). Cham: Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-

319 -78999 -6_30 

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., et al. (2023, 

August 1). Attention is all you need. arXiv. Retrieved from 

http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 

Voleti, V., Yao, C. -H., Boss, M., Letts, A., Pankratz, D., Tochilkin, D., et al. (2024). SV3D: 

Novel multi -view synthesis and 3D generation from a single image using latent video 

diffusion. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2403.12008 .

Wang, F., Huang, X., & Alkhalifah, T. (2024). Controllable seismic velocity synthesis using 

generative diffusion models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06277 .

Wang, T. -C., Liu, M. -Y., Zhu, J. -Y., Liu, G., Tao, A., Kautz, J., & Catanzaro, B. (2018). Video -to -

video synthesis. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1808.06601 .

Wu, Y., & He, K. (2018). Group normalization. In Proceedings of the European conference on 

computer vision (ECCV) (pp. 3 –19). Xing, Z., Feng, Q., Chen, H., Dai, Q., Hu, H., Xu, H., et al. (2023). A survey on video diffusion 

models. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2310.10647 .

Xu, M., Song, S., & Mukerji, T. (2026). DiffSIM: Unconditional and conditional facies 

simulation based on denoising diffusion generative models [Data set]. Zenodo. 

https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.18904773 

Yang, L., Zhang, Z., Song, Y., Hong, S., Xu, R., Zhao, Y., et al. (2024). Diffusion models: A 

comprehensive survey of methods and applications. ACM Computing Surveys , 56 (4), 

1–39. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626235 

Zagoruyko, S. (2016). Wide residual networks. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1605.07146 .

Zhang, T. -F., Tilke, P., Dupont, E., Zhu, L. -C., Liang, L., & Bailey, W. (2019). Generating 

geologically realistic 3D reservoir facies models using deep learning of sedimentary 

architecture with generative adversarial networks. Petroleum Science , 16 (3), 541 –

549. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12182 -019 -0328 -4